--- Page 1 ---
FGRBI  
Key Indicators 
Manual
Scan code to visit fgrbi.com

--- Page 2 ---
Juliann Woods
Fairbank, IA
50629
The user of this manual is responsible for following all local, state, and federal rules, regulations, and 
licensing requirements. This manual is not intended to be a guide for compliance or to replace any applicable 
rules or regulations. FGRBI is not liable for any issues that arise from using this manual against these rules 
or requirements.
Copyright ©2025 Juliann Woods. All rights are reserved. Unauthorized reproduction or modification of 
any portion of this manual, in any form or by any means, is prohibited without the express written consent 
of the author.
Citation
Woods. J. (2025). FGRBI Key Indicators Manua l (8th ed.)  [Unpublished manual]. FGRBI Partners.
First Printing, 2015
This research was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences,  
U.S. Department of Education, through Grant R324A130121 to Juliann Woods.
FGRBI

--- Page 3 ---
This edition of the FGRBI Key Indicators Checklist and Manual 
has been a labor of love. Over the past 30 years, our team of 
researchers and practitioners have developed and evaluated 
the FGRBI Key Indicators (KIs) through community-based 
implementation. We have refined their use by reviewing 
research on congruent models, conducting consumer interviews, 
and conducting our own research studies in conjunction with 
community programs. Each study, experience, and evaluation 
has guided us in improving the checklist and the supporting 
materials for implementation. The phrase “the devil is in the 
details” is one we take to heart. Each edition has increased 
the specificity of the KIs with the intention of guiding providers 
to see and hear the words as we intended. We don’t want to 
overwhelm providers with information; instead, we want to help 
them develop their practices supporting the FGRBI model.
Our goal is to encourage providers to support caregivers and 
their children’s learning and development through a collaborative 
partnership. We believe this manual offers “how-to” strategies 
for coaching caregivers during home visits, frameworks for 
implementing embedded intervention in everyday routines 
and activities preferred by the families, ideas for supporting 
caregiver participation and decision-making, and strategies for 
meaningful and functional measurements of child progress. 
We hope you find the resources in this manual helpful as you 
continue your work with children and families. Thank you for your 
dedication to early intervention—it really makes a difference! 
A heartfelt thank you to all the amazing providers and families 
who have been part of the FGRBI journey over the years. Your 
contributions mean so much!
Juliann Woods, Ph.D.  Juliann Woods, Ph.D.  
CCC-SLPCCC-SLP
ContributorsContributors
Katrina Cripe, B.A.  Katrina Cripe, B.A.  
Mollie Romano, Ph.D.,  Mollie Romano, Ph.D.,  
CCC-SLP CCC-SLP 
Research Support Research Support 
Communication and Early Communication and Early 
Childhood Research and Childhood Research and 
Practice (CEC-RAP) Center,Practice (CEC-RAP) Center,
Florida State UniversityFlorida State UniversityLetter from


--- Page 4 ---
For more information and resources, please visit the FGRBI website at: fgrbi.comAcknowledgments
Contributions to the development and research on FGRBI from collaborating projects:
•Embedded Practices for Intervention with Caregivers (EPIC), Institute of Education Sciences
(R324A130121)
–Patricia Snyder, Ph.D., University of Florida
–Christine Salisbury, Ph.D., University of Illinois - Chicago
We would like to express our deep gratitude to the numerous students and staff who played a vital role in supporting the FGRBI journey throughout the years. Without your energy, dedication, and persistence, the research and results would not have been possible.
We would like to acknowledge the EI professionals who reviewed drafts of this manual and 
provided feedback:
•Shubha Kashinath, Ph.D., CCC-SLP , Co-Director, Center for Disability Justice Research: HealthEquity, Education, and Creativity, California State University - East Bay
•Susie Rensch, M.Ed., Early Childhood Specialist, FGRBI Master Coach
•Jennifer Batenhorst, M.S., Early Childhood Specialist, Green Hills AEA, FGRBI Master Coach
•Stacey Landberg, M.S., CCC-SLP , Pediatric Speech-Language Pathologist, Consultant,
Los Angeles, CA
•Jennifer Brown, Ph.D., CCC-SLP , Professor, University of Georgia
We would like to give special recognition to the administrators and leaders of state agencies, programs, and universities who collaborated with us. We could not have been successful without your encouragement and feedback in the evaluation and evolution of FGRBI. The successful and sustainable implementation of community-based programs would not be possible without your participation.
And especially thank you to all of the families and 
providers who have contributed to the ongoing development of the FGRBI and Caregiver Coaching model. Your wisdom, experience, and perspective have been an inspiration to expand supports and 
services to the early intervention community.   


--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
© 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualIntroduction 1
Words Matter  ............................................................................................................. 1
How to Use the FGRBI Key Indicators Manual  .......................................................... 3
FGRBI Key Indicators Manual 7
SS-OO-PP-RR Coaching Framework: Brief Description of Components  ................... 9
Implementing FGRBI Using the SS-OO-PP-RR Coaching Framework  ..................... 11
FGRBI Key Indicators Checklist  ................................................................................ 13
KI-1. Gather Caregiver/Family Updates  ........................................................ 15
Connecting with Caregivers  ......................................................................... 17
Building Family Confidence and Competence  ............................................ 18
KI-2. Gather Child Intervention Updates  ....................................................... 19
Connecting the KIs: Making the most of KI-2  .............................................. 21
KI-2 Questions and Answers  ........................................................................ 22
KI-3. Share Developmental Information & Review Family Interests  ............. 23
KI-3 and the Family 5Q  ................................................................................ 25
KI-3 and the IFSP  .......................................................................................... 26
KI-4. Develop a Session Plan  ......................................................................... 27
What do you do when...  ............................................................................... 29
Thoughts and Ideas About KI-4  ................................................................... 30
KI-5. Observe Caregiver/Child Interaction  .................................................... 31
Making the Most of Observation: What can you learn?  ............................... 33
KI-5 Questions and Answers  ........................................................................ 34
KI-6.	 Use	Coaching	Strategies	Matched	to	Caregiver-identified	Routines  ......... 35
Routine Categories & Teaching and Learning Cycle  .................................... 37
Putting it all Together: Clarisa’s Case Study  ................................................. 38
KI-7.	 Provide	General	and	Specific	Feedback  ............................................... 39
Using Feedback  ............................................................................................ 41
Putting it all Together: Ford’s Case Study - Part 1  ........................................ 42

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
© 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-8. Problem Solve Using Instructional Strategies  ....................................... 43
Evidence-based Instructional Strategies  ...................................................... 45
Putting it all Together: Ford’s Case Study - Part 2  ........................................ 46
KI-9. Expand Opportunities and Contexts to Practice in Routines  ................ 47
Supporting Caregivers to Expand Everyday Routines  ................................. 49
Getting to Yes in KI-9  ................................................................................... 50
KI-10.	Promote	Caregiver	Reflection	and	Review  ........................................... 51
Using Reflection and Review  ........................................................................ 53
Differences Between: Information Gathering & Reflection  .......................... 54
KI-11. Identify How to Know It’s Working  ....................................................... 55
Measuring Progress is More than Numbers  ................................................. 57
KI-11 Questions and Answers  ...................................................................... 58
KI-12. Develop an Action Plan for Next Steps  ................................................ 59
Connecting the KIs with the Family 5Q ........................................................ 61
Family and Provider Quotes: What works for KI-12? .................................... 62
References  ............................................................................................................... 63
Early Care and Education 65
SS-OO-PP-RR Coaching in Early Care and Education  ............................................. 67
Using SS-OO-PP-RR as a Familiar and Flexible Framework in ECE Pr ograms  ......... 71 
Early Care and Education Questions and Answers  .................................................. 75
Teacher and Provider Quotes: What works for ECE?  ............................................... 76
What have we learned?  ........................................................................................... 77
Appendices 79
Supplemental Materials  ................................................................................... 81
FGRBI Coaching Strategies  .......................................................................... 83
FGRBI Family Routine Categories  ................................................................ 87
Systematic Use of Instructional Strategies  ................................................... 89
Embedding in Everyday Routines  ................................................................ 95
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Action Plan  ............................. 97

--- Page 7 ---
Introduction
Words Matter
The way we communicate can significantly influence how our messages are received and 
understood. While words have the power to clarify ideas, they can also lead to confusion due 
to the diverse backgrounds, experiences, and beliefs of both speakers and listeners. In the 
context of early intervention (EI), our individual interpretations of commonly used terms can vary 
significantly. However, coming together with shared ideas and common goals fosters effective 
partnerships, ensuring each child and family receives personalized support.
Having a common roadmap enhances collaboration among families, caregivers, and EI team 
members. This manual aims to support the development of an authentic action plan that aligns 
with the families’ values and priorities, utilizing the best available evidence in early intervention 
practices. By focusing on the importance of meaningful words exchanged in respectful 
partnerships, we can build stronger connections and work more effectively together.
The FGRBI Key Indicators Manual uses the terms “parents”, “family”, and “caregivers” to identify 
individuals participating in coaching to support embedded intervention for children in EI. We 
interchange the terms or use both to convey that being family guided is not limited to specific 
individuals engaged with the child, but rather inclusive of the community of familiar adults that 
can support the child’s learning, as determined by their family. 
We also interchange the terms “home visit”, “visit”, and “session” because coaching is not limited 
to a specific location. Children are increasingly likely to be served in community programs or 
childcare, instead of or in addition to, at home. Coaching can also occur via teleintervention. The 
location may impact the organization of the model, but the practices and principles are constant. 
Providers or the agency they are employed by may have preferences for the terms used. What do we mean when we say… 
1 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 8 ---
Introduction
We do have some terms that are not used interchangeably that we would like to clarify. 
1. Strategy  - The word “strategy” is integral to the intervention and coaching process, but can be confusing. 
In its generic version, “strategy” refers to a way of approaching or doing something, a technique, or a plan 
to accomplish a goal or encourage change. This manual references three types of “strategies,” each with 
its own specific meaning.
• Intervention strategies  - Intervention strategies is a general term that refers to a range of services, 
techniques, materials, or resources used to assist children in learning and developing to their fullest 
potential. We use this term to refer to general strategies for children aged from birth to three who 
have developmental delays or disabilities and are enrolled in early intervention Part C services.
• Instructional strategies  - Instructional strategies are a subset of intervention strategies and activities used 
by providers and parents. They are specific, evidence-based, or informed techniques that are applied 
systematically and intentionally to maximize learning on the child’s targets in routines. Instructional 
strategies are defined and described so that they can be taught to caregivers to use with their child, 
e.g., wait time, verbal cues, and physical assistance, and are observable and measurable. 
• Coaching strategies  - Providers use coaching strategies to support caregivers’ learning to embed 
intervention for their child. These include general and specific strategies such as information sharing, 
observation, direct teaching, reflection, etc. The purpose of coaching strategies is to “teach” the caregiver 
how to use various instructional strategies that will support or teach their child’s learning targets. In 
summary, the child is enrolled in an early intervention program that includes a variety of general and 
specific intervention services, supports, and strategies. Providers use coaching strategies with caregivers 
to support them to use and benefit from both general intervention strategies and specific instructional 
strategies to help their child learn. 
2. Plan - We plan for different things in our own lives. A plan is a detailed proposal decided on and arranged 
in advance. Some are broad and projected for a future date (e.g., a five-year plan), while others are more 
immediate (e.g., a daily plan). In EI, the term “plan” is used to describe both immediate and long-range 
plans. The child, family, and provider, as a team, participate in multiple planning activities in EI.
• IFSP - The Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) is the plan identified in the IDEA, Part C legislation that 
delineates specific services and supports developed collaboratively by the family and EI professionals 
to assist an eligible child with developmental delays or disabilities. The plan, which identifies family 
priorities and establishes measurable outcomes based on the child’s development, is reviewed and 
updated every six months. 
• Intervention (EI) plan - The intervention plan is a commonly used term that refers to a current plan that 
describes how each outcome is being addressed by the child’s team of providers. It is linked to the IFSP 
outcome and is reviewed and revised by the team or provider as needed.
• Session plan  - The session plan outlines the focus of the home visit or session based on the child’s 
current targets, progress, family priorities, and the next steps relevant to addressing the outcomes from 
the IFSP . It’s guided by the caregiver to ensure it addresses their information and coaching needs for 
embedding intervention within their everyday routines.
• Action plan  - The action plan describes how the caregiver(s) will support the child’s learning between 
visits, in their own words, and in a format that is best for them (sticky note, paper document, text 
message). This is their plan and includes the details they need to practice and provide opportunities for 
their child by answering the 5Qs, What  (targets), When/Where  (routines), How (strategies), how they will 
know It is working , (progress) and Why (it is important to meet the outcome.) 
2 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 9 ---
This manual is the latest edition that outlines Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) 
and Caregiver Coaching practices and principles for implementation. The manual is not intended to 
provide an exhaustive explanation of the model but rather focuses on how to use FGRBI and Caregiver 
Coaching to support children and families receiving EI services.
Obviously, we think it’s important for you to read the manual carefully and have it available to refer to 
while you are learning the practices and applying the principles. Community providers have guided us 
in the development of the manual and encouraged the addition of examples and case studies. Even 
our most experienced coaches shared they still “check their manual” to answer questions, gather 
ideas, or remind themselves “why” a practice is important. 
Let’s look at what’s in the manual! The front section materials provide an overview of FGRBI, describe 
and illustrate SS-OO-PP-RR and the Family 5Q, and present a crosswalk between the two frameworks. 
This content is helpful if you are not familiar with the FGRBI model or would like a quick review. 
The FGRBI Key Indicators Checklist is included as it is used and explained throughout, with annotations 
that identify changes made for this edition. Additional explanations of these changes can be found on 
the FGRBI website, fgrbi.com .
KIs 1-12 are individually described and laid out in a consistent format to make it easy to identify the 
information you need. Here is what you can expect in the following sections:
Description
The practices and principles of each of the 12 FGRBI Key 
Indicators are clearly identified in the opening paragraphs, along 
with a rationale for their importance. Understanding why each KI is 
an important practice and how to apply the principles enhances 
your learning journey. While the intent of the description is not to 
cover every aspect of the KIs, it does provide a rationale and 
purpose that incorporates family-centered, adult learning, and 
culturally responsive principles.
Looks Like/Doesn’t Look Like
This section aims to illustrate what the practice “Looks Like” when 
implemented using the model, compared to how it may occur in a 
more child-directed approach. The “Doesn’t Look Like” component 
highlights methods that may be unintentionally disrupting 
the coaching process. It’s easy to think you are applying a practice 
as described, only to realize that what you thought it meant differs 
from its intended application. Each example points out common 
practices that promote caregiver participation and decision-making, 
as well as differences between caregiver coaching and child-focused 
interventions.
3 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualIntroduction
How to Use the FGRBI Key Indicators Manual


--- Page 10 ---
4 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualIntroduction
Examples
A few ideas from other practitioners are shared to offer suggestions 
for you to adapt for your families and contexts. Keep in mind ther e 
are no perfect examples… just the ones that support the caregiver’s 
engagement and build their confidence. Feel free to adapt the ideas 
shared to match your caregiver’s cultural background and experiences.
Considerations
This section includes a variety of tips and reminders for using the KI 
as it is intended. The application of each KI is designed to be flexible 
so that it respects both the child and family and their experiences 
and priorities. Considerations offer ideas on how to get started and 
problem solve strategies to use when things don’t go quite as 
expected. The specificity of the practices is identified to help you 
understand and incorporate the measurable features of the KI. For 
example, caregiver-identified routines must be at least 20 seconds in 
KI-5, and in KI-7, four of the six examples of feedback must be 
specific and strengths-based for the caregiver.
Rubric
KIs are scored on a 3-point scale: Yes – 2 points, Partial – 1 point, and 
Not Observed – 0 points. The rubric describes in measurable and 
observable terms, what it takes to score at each rating. It’s important to 
note that in some descriptions, the terms “ AND ” or “ OR” are 
included, indicating that there are multiple components to the practice 
that will impact the score. The rubric is used to support your learning 
to apply the practices intentionally, not to grade your performance.
Application Materials
New to this edition of the manual are application suggestions and 
resources intended to enhance your understanding of each KI and 
help you successfully apply them. The content varies by KI and is 
based on feedback from providers about what additional information 
they found useful to their implementation.
Sometimes, you will see additional details on what is required to get 
a Yes on a specific indicator, along with strategies for moving from a 
Partial to a Yes on the rubric. Other examples offer a deeper dive into 
the rationale for a principle or practice (e.g., why it’s important to 
connect the IFSP to planning the next targets or session plan, or a 
handout illustrating how to include multiple targets in multiple routines 
for a child and caregiver). Case studies are offered as examples of how 
providers have applied indicators while coaching. Anecdotes from 
providers are shared as suggestions and encouragement.


--- Page 11 ---
5 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualIntroduction
Reflection Questions
At the end of each KI, questions are posed to encourage reflection 
on the practices discussed. These questions are designed to 
stimulate critical thinking and encourage you to consider how the 
information applies to your own experiences and understanding. We 
learn through reflecting and practice and encourage you to engage  
in self-reflection with each visit.
Reference List
The Reference List included at the end of the manual contains the peer-reviewed evidence-based 
research cited in this manual.
Early Care and Education 
This special section introduces the application and adaptation of FGRBI and Caregiver Coaching to 
Early Care and Education settings. While it is not intended to be a comprehensive guide to using 
coaching in childcare or early education programs, it provides basic information and strategies to 
help get you started. Based on research conducted in these programs, the strategies and adaptations 
presented are both flexible and feasible, requiring only a willingness to collaborate on your part and 
a little creativity.
Appendices
The appendices comprise a range of supplemental materials illustrated throughout the manual 
that we have developed for providers, which we believe will be beneficial to you.
The materials in the appendices are designed to complement the content in the manual. For additional 
handouts and resources, we invite you to check out our website, fgrbi.com !
No model is unique. EI caregiver coaching frameworks share many similarities, including the theories 
and research that support their development and application. The words we share are based not only 
on our work but on the work of many other collaborators, colleagues, and leaders in the field. We thank 
them. We hope you find some intriguing reading in the list that will deepen your understanding and 
application of caregiver coaching.

--- Page 13 ---
FGRBI  
Key Indicators Manual
© 2025 Juliann Woods


--- Page 15 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
SS-OO-PP-RR Coaching Framework  
Brief Description of Components
The four components, identified by the acronym SS-OO-PP-RR, are Setting the Stage, Observation and 
Opportunities to Embed, Problem Solving and Planning, and Reflection and Review. They provide a 
framework for integrating the practices and principles of Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) 
and Caregiver Coaching during home visits with family members and other caregivers. Each SS-OO-PP-RR 
component is briefly described as an introduction to the coaching process.
Setting the Stage (SS)
Setting the Stage is more than a friendly exchange 
of greetings at the onset of the home visit. During 
Setting the Stage, the collaborative partnership 
between the provider and the caregiver is established 
to promote the caregiver’s role of active participation 
and decision-making throughout the session.
When setting the stage for the visit, the provider 
encourages caregiver reflection on updates about the 
family and their child’s outcomes by asking questions 
and discussing strategies and routines. The provider 
listens, offers information, facilitates problem solving 
strategies to address family questions or priorities, 
and, with the caregiver, addresses any changes or 
modifications the family prioritizes. Introducing and 
discussing material before practicing the content 
in routines is associated with better outcomes for 
children and families (Dunst & Trivette, 2009).
The provider and caregiver collaborate on the 
identification of targets, activities, routines, and 
strategies that the caregiver will embed during 
the session. Studies have also shown that giving 
adults input into what they are learning increases 
their motivation and ability to acquire new skills 
(Merriam & Baumgartner, 2020).Observations &  
Opportunities to Embed (OO)
Observation occurs when the provider intentionally 
watches the caregiver and child interact in a 
routine prior to offering coaching or feedback. 
By stepping back to observe, the provider 
reminds caregivers that the goal of intervention 
is to support their interactions with the child. The 
caregiver leads the routine/activity with the child, 
allowing the provider to observe how consistently 
and accurately the caregiver uses evidence-based 
(EB) instructional strategies and how the child 
responds. The provider uses the information to 
provide strengths-based feedback to the caregiver 
that builds on strategies they are already using and 
to identify additional strategies that may support 
embedding in family routines.
Opportunities to Embed emphasizes embedding 
strategies in everyday routines with coaching from 
the provider to support the child independently 
using the targets. Parents, like all adult learners, 
benefit from repetition, explicit feedback in the 
context in which they are learning, and additional 
supports that decrease as they become more 
comfortable and skilled using a new strategy. 
Opportunities to Embed increases interaction with 
the child to enhance the caregiver’s competence. 
In this component, the provider intentionally and 
systematically arranges for caregivers to embed 
evidence-based strategies in routines and activities 
with their child. The provider also focuses the 
caregiver’s attention on the child’s responses. The 
provider’s role and the coaching strategies used will 
vary across routines and child outcomes. However, 
there should be multiple opportunities for the 
caregiver and child to interact and receive coaching 
and feedback during each routine, with multiple 
routines being practiced in most sessions.
9 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 16 ---
Gather caregiver/family 
and child updates
•
Share developmental 
information & review 
family interests 
•
Develop session planObserve caregiver/child 
interaction 
•
Use coaching strategies 
matched to caregiver & 
child in multiple routines
•
Provide general and 
specific feedbackProblem solve 
instructional strategies 
•
Expand
opportunities and 
contexts to practice in 
everyday routinesPromote caregiver 
reflection & review
•
 Identify how to know it’s 
working
•
Develop action plan for 
next steps
SS - Setting the StageOO - Observation 
& Opportunities to 
EmbedPP - Problem Solving  
& PlanningRR - Reflection  
& ReviewProblem Solving and Planning (PP)
Problem Solving is not necessarily an exchange unique 
to a “problem” or challenging situation. It refers to a 
verbal exchange between the parent and provider that 
serves to gather information, discuss, and evaluate the 
ideas and options to develop or revise an action plan. 
It is a coaching strategy that encourages caregivers 
to think and talk about what they are doing and how 
the child is learning with the intention of improving 
or increasing participation. When problem solving, 
caregivers share their knowledge of the child and their 
priorities and experiences for what works best for their 
family. The caregiver also gains new information by 
brainstorming options, discussing the pros and cons of 
the possibilities, and formulating plans with the provider. 
Taking the ideas generated and forming specific plans 
encourages caregivers to act on their decisions.
Both Problem Solving and Planning use the parent’s 
metacognitive skills, i.e., their ability to think and talk 
about what they are learning and doing (Knowles et al., 
2005). Guiding adults’ use of reflection and evaluation 
of their child’s targets, intervention strategies, and 
routines or activities helps increase their ability 
to use, retain, and generalize new skills (Dunst & 
Trivette, 2009). In this component, the focus is on 
ensuring there is a match between the intervention 
strategies the caregiver is using to embed the child’s 
targets in the routines and activities. Problem solving 
throughout the session, but especially at the end of 
each routine and prior to the provider’s departure, 
offers opportunities to try out the plan to ensure 
the caregiver feels competent and confident in its 
feasibility. Planning provides support for deliberate 
and systematic practice throughout the family’s daily 
activities as they occur.Reflection and Review (RR) 
Reflection is a valuable coaching strategy for motivating 
caregivers to think and talk about what they are seeing 
and doing with their child to intentionally support 
learning. Reflection builds confidence and autonomy 
when the provider supports the caregiver through 
open-ended questions and encouraging comments 
to discuss what has worked, what is happening now, 
and what the caregiver wants to do next. Reflection is 
key to caregivers’ understanding of their knowledge 
and skills as they build capacity for participation 
in both child and family outcomes and occurs in all 
components of SS-OO-PP-RR.
Reflection and Review are interrelated. We encourage 
the use of reflection to inform the review process. When 
caregivers review the visit, they identify what they have 
discussed, practiced, and experienced during the home 
visit. This will help them organize knowledge in their 
framework to facilitate retrieval and application. The 
provider listens carefully to the caregiver’s descriptions 
and provides additional support as needed. Reviewing 
ensures the caregiver and provider are on the “same 
page” about family priorities, what will occur between 
visits, and what the plan is for the next visit. The 
process clarifies the plan and helps the caregiver retain 
and systematize what, how, when, and where the 
intervention will occur throughout the day.
When caregivers lead the action planning process 
rather than the provider, they use their own words to 
relate it to their everyday experiences. They describe 
how they will participate and how they will know the 
intervention is working as their child participates. 
Review supports the caregivers’ retention of the 
information and their commitment to action and 
informs the provider’s documentation.  
10 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 17 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
Implementing FGRBI Using the  
SS-OO-PP-RR Coaching Framework
    FGRBISS-OO-PP-RRFamily Guided, 
Individualized, 
Culturally 
Responsive 
SupportsEveryday 
Routines and 
ActivitiesFunctional, 
Participation-
Based 
Outcomes Embedded, 
Evidence-
Based (EB) 
Instruction
Setting the 
StageListen to the family 
as they share 
updates and ideas 
and identify their 
choices and priorities 
for the visit. Identifying the 
family-preferred 
routines and 
activities and 
partners to support 
learning throughout 
their day.Prioritize the 
caregiver and 
child’s functional 
outcomes and 
“right-sized” 
targets that 
support meaningful 
participation.Discuss EB 
strategies that are 
working well, the 
pros and cons of 
others to try, and 
how and when to 
embed them. 
Observation  
and  
Opportunities 
to EmbedListen, watch, and 
learn what the family 
does, how they do it, 
what they enjoy, and 
what they believe 
is important and 
relevant for their 
plan to support the 
child’s learning. Observe the 
caregiver/child 
participating in their 
routines. Comment 
on strengths 
and identify 
opportunities for 
embedding in 
multiple and varied 
routines that occur 
throughout their day.Coach the 
caregiver to 
increase the child’s 
participation in 
identified targets 
and measurable 
steps to increase 
engagement and 
independence.Coach the 
caregiver to use 
EB strategies that 
match the child’s 
learning, promote 
the caregivers’ 
ability to teach 
new skills, and 
support the child’s 
developmental 
independence.
Problem 
Solving and 
Planning Use the caregivers’ 
current priorities and 
engage in planning 
to problem solve the 
next steps between 
visits.Brainstorm how to 
expand participation 
or add repetition 
in current and 
additional routines 
meaningful to the 
family.Discuss what is 
working (and not) 
for the child and 
caregiver and 
discuss steps to 
revise or expand 
targets to support 
progress. Promote the 
caregiver’s 
decision-making 
on the systematic 
use of EB 
strategies for 
targets in routines 
and throughout  
the day.
Reflection and 
ReviewReflect/review 
with the caregiver 
on strengths and 
strategies based on 
their priorities and 
additional supports 
needed, if any. Review the 
expansion to new, 
diverse routines 
with other partners 
and places for 
generalization.Reflect/review the 
action plan linking 
current targets/
skills to long-
range outcomes 
prioritized by the 
family.Review/reflect on 
how the strategies 
are working, what 
progress looks 
like, and what 
the backup plan 
should be for the 
action plan. 
11 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual©2016

--- Page 19 ---
Setting the Stage Yes PartialNot 
Observed
KI-1. Gathers updates on the caregiver and family - listens and encourages caregiver reflection
KI-2. Asks the caregiver to update intervention implementation since the last visit -  listens, 
encourages caregiver reflection, and sets up problem solving as needed
KI-3. Shares information about child development and family interests - connects learning 
targets to functional outcomes and IFSP priorities to increase caregiver knowledge and resources
Minimum of 3 examples of developmental information or rationale connected to a target, 
routine, strategy, or family priority, with at least one linked to an IFSP outcome
KI-4.	 Jointly	identifies	or	clarifies	the	targets,	routines,	and	strategies	for	the	session	-  
facilitates caregiver participation and decision-making in the discussion
Observation and Opportunities to Embed Yes PartialNot 
Observed
KI-5. Observes the caregiver/child interaction in routines -  provides strengths-based feedback 
and builds on dyad interaction
KI-6. Uses multiple coaching strategies matched to caregiver and child behaviors in 
multiple	caregiver-identified	routines	-	 scaffolds and repeats to build competence and 
confidence
Minimum	of	3	different	caregiver-identified	routines	from	2-3	different	routine	categories	
using	at	least	3	specific	coaching	strategies
Routine/Category 1:  ____________________________________ Coaching Strategies 1: qDT qDN qGP qCP qPS qRe
Routine/Category 2:  ____________________________________ Coaching Strategies 2: qDT qDN qGP qCP qPS qRe
Routine 3:  ____________________________________________ Coaching Strategies 3: qDT qDN qGP qCP qPS qRe
KI-7.	 Provides	general	and	specific	strengths-based	feedback	on	caregiver	and	child	
behaviors and interactions - encourages caregiver and child engagement
Minimum	of	6	examples	of	feedback	with	at	least	4	being	specific	feedback	to	caregivers
Problem Solving and Planning Yes PartialNot 
Observed
KI-8. Problem solves with the caregiver about evidence-based instructional strategies to 
embed - discusses and decides which interventions are best for the child and family
Minimum of 2 distinct problem solving exchanges of 4 turns (2 caregiver-2 provider)
KI-9. Supports the caregiver to identify new or expand current opportunities multiple 
times across routine categories and describes strategies to embed - plans to increase 
opportunities and generalize use in everyday contexts
Minimum of 3 new or expanded on routines from at least 2 routine categories
Reflection and Review Yes PartialNot 
Observed
KI-10.	 Asks	questions	and	makes	comments	that	promote	caregiver	reflection	and	review	-	
identifies what works for the caregiver and child
Minimum	of	3	reflection	and	1	review	across	the	session
KI-11. Encourages the caregiver to describe what it will look like when the intervention is 
working - specifies a functional measure of the target within routines
KI-12. Engages the caregiver to lead the development of an action plan for embedding 
intervention in multiple routines and activities throughout the day - facilitates 
caregiver leadership and decision-makingFGRBI Key Indicators Checklist
This checklist is to be used in conjunction with the FGRBI Key Indicators Manual 
DT = direct teaching; DN = demonstration with narration; GP = guided practice; CP = caregiver practice; PS = problem solving; Re = reflection
13 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 21 ---
When you coach the caregiver during the home visit rather 
than working directly with the child, your focus is on the 
interaction between the caregiver and child. Asking about the 
caregiver and family during each session increases information 
about their everyday activities and family priorities. Family 
updates enhance your ability to individualize the intervention 
to the family, including the child, rather than only for the child. 
Checking in with the caregiver on their recent activities and how 
they are doing can impact planning for the session and support 
the “match” that ensures the caregiver’s active participation. 
Greeting the caregiver and child and inquiring about their well-
being is a common and respectful starting place for a home 
visit. While initial comments may vary based on social context and culture, the inquiry serves to establish your 
presence and genuine interest in the family’s information and activities. These insights are integral to individualizing 
an intervention plan guided by the family’s strengths, choices, and culture. Focusing on the family reflects your 
understanding that membership in the family unit impacts the child’s learning and development and supports the 
caregiver as an informed collaborator and decision-maker.
An added benefit of gathering family updates is the opportunity it provides to reinforce the importance of the 
family’s role in embedding intervention for their child. Coaching is new to many caregivers, so they may have 
questions even beyond the initial session. Listening and responding to family updates offers additional opportunities 
for sharing information and authentic examples of how and why coaching works. Making connections between 
what the caregiver and child are doing in everyday activities reminds them of how coaching works, reinforces 
their engagement, and provides an opportunity for them to ask questions or make comments that increase their 
understanding and motivation for participation.
Examples of Key Indicator 1. 
• “Hi! It’s great to see you. How has 
everyone been?”
• “Catch me up on what’s been happening 
with you and the siblings. It’s soccer 
season, right?”
• “Tell me about your week. How’s it going 
for everyone?”
• “It’s such a nice day today. What’s new 
with you and the family?”
• “You told me how Omar did on the trip. 
Now, how did it go for you?”Setting the Stage
Looks Like
Asking open-ended questions about the caregiver and 
family to learn more about them, their interests, and 
priorities (e.g., “I’ve been looking forward to catching up 
with you. What’s been happening?”).
Taking time to establish and build the relationship through 
respectful conversations and updates (e.g., “It’s exciting 
that Grandpa is coming. What do you think he would like 
to do with Aoha when he visits?”).
Being responsive by commenting when the caregiver 
shares information about what’s happening with the family 
and including it in the session (e.g., “Playing ball sounds 
like fun. Should we try it?”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Jumping right into coaching the caregiver or interacting 
with the child without “checking in” about the family.
Nodding but not engaging when the family shares details 
about what has occurred since the last visit.
Pulling out documentation from past visits to review while 
the caregiver talks rather than listening and responding.Gathers updates on the caregiver and family -  listens and 
encourages caregiver reflection1
15 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual“...interventions must do more than build 
on family strengths: They must be consis -
tent with, and embedded in, the everyday 
business of family life.”
Bernheimer & Keogh, 1995

--- Page 22 ---
Setting the Stage Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-1. Gathers updates on 
the caregiver and family 
- listens and encourages 
caregiver reflectionScore Yes if the provider 
asks or comments about 
the family’s well-being and 
the caregiver responds with 
family updates OR if the 
provider asks and follows up 
with another prompt if the 
family does not respond or 
only child updates are given.Score Partial if the provider 
asks or makes comments 
about the family’s well-
being AND  does not follow 
up when only child updates 
or no response is given.Score N/O if there is no clear 
request for family/caregiver 
updates.Considerations for Key Indicator 1. 
For families new to the EI program,  you may need to explain 
why you are asking family-oriented questions. Share that you 
want to learn about what they do, how they support their child’s 
learning, and how this information will be used to individualize 
their session plan. These conversations are extensions of the 
IFSP process and are be repeated as needed. Sharing a brief 
video, written explanations, or using a cultural mediator may 
also increase their understanding and participation.
We know from adult learning research  that participation 
increases with successful interactions, so conversations early in 
the session build the caregiver’s confidence for problem solving 
and planning later. Self-reflection is another adult learning 
strategy that supports caregiver participation. Encourage the 
family to reflect on why they enjoyed an activity, what they did that seemed to work the best, or how the child and 
family responded. Listen to the family’s responses so you can also include their ideas in the session plan.
Encourage the family to reflect  on why they enjoyed an activity or what they did that helped the child participate 
with the family. Cultural differences in child and family outcomes, child behavioral expectations, priorities, roles, 
and structure affect how families organize their everyday routines and activities. You can learn about the family’s 
cultural background, traditions, and how they organize their routines within their day by observing and listening while 
collecting family updates. 
Follow-up questions or comments may be useful to encourage reflection. The difference between a “one-turn 
question and answer” and a “relationship-building conversation” can be the use of follow-up questions or comments. 
It’s helpful to have a few general follow-up questions or comments that can be used to encourage the caregiver to 
share updates with you (see KI-10 for examples). Since family updates can be important for planning the session, 
asking follow-up questions early allows their information and ideas to be incorporated.
If the visit starts with you joining an activity  (e.g., they are outside playing or in the middle of lunch), there may not be 
time for family updates initially. Revisit KI-1 later in the visit to check in with the family. If the parent immediately jumps 
into intervention updates (KI-2), follow their lead and inquire about the whole family after the intervention updates. 
If you get stuck finding a question or comment,  use the previous session note or action plan to follow up on family 
activities (e.g., visitors, appointments, going to the park). Be cautious not to focus only on your notes but rather to 
use them to start or keep the conversation going. Be sensitive about topics the family would prefer not to discuss.
Self-reflection is an essential practice for early intervention providers  to use with families and for themselves. 
Thinking about the child and family, as well as their priorities, preferences, values, and beliefs, is as integral a 
component in the process used to prepare for the visit as stopping and reflecting after the visit. Asking caregivers 
reflection questions, such as “What do you think worked? What didn’t?” helps build a collaborative relationship with 
them to enhance their confidence and competence.
16 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-1Gathers updates on the caregiver and family -  listens and encourages caregiver 
reflection

--- Page 23 ---
Connecting with Caregivers
17 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualResearch in neuroscience has elevated our understanding of the value of connections between young children and 
their caregivers. In early intervention, we focus on coaching caregivers to connect with their children frequently, 
in responsive, reciprocal, warm, and language-rich interactions, and to engage in predictable and repetitive daily 
routines important for learning and social-emotional development (Shonkoff, 2011).
Coaching Conversations Include:
Engaging in reciprocal interactions 
that facilitate the caregiver’s 
participation and decision-makingOffering strengths-based 
feedback, and problem solving 
strategies and supportsConnecting authentically with 
the caregiver(s) and child in 
their activities
Neuroscience research is linked to KI-1 because we know that positive, respectful, and trusting relationships with 
caregivers influence their engagement with us and, more importantly, with their child when they embed intervention. 
The more back and forth between babies and parents, the greater the growth of the brain in areas critical to the 
child’s ability to learn language and develop social connections, which are essential lifelong skills.
Too often, children and families face conditions that negatively impact developmental, health, and 
education outcomes. Young children with developmental delays are at a higher risk for abuse or neglect. 
In addition, children served in early intervention may be vulnerable to conditions such as violence, poverty, 
substance exposure, and experiencing homelessness at higher rates.
We connect with all families in KI-1. What strategies can you use to ensure each family hears that you care and 
are trying to understand their concerns and priorities? How do you seek to understand from their perspective?Connecting with Families in Adverse SituationsKI-1Gathers updates on the caregiver and family -  listens and encourages caregiver 
reflection
Even though we share the same neurological wiring, our picture of the world and our 
experiences are shaped by our genetics, experiences, perspectives, points of view, age, 
and cultural beliefs. All of these elements affect our perspectives, expectations, and 
attitudes about life.Think  
About
Magnuson & Schindler, 2019
Strategies to Connect
 
Use facial 
expressions (e.g., 
smile, eye gaze) 
to show interest in 
connecting. Gaze 
shifts are expected. 
Diverting eye 
contact may help 
manage feelings. So, 
read cues, respond, 
and reciprocate with 
understanding. Manage the speed 
and volume of your 
voice to match the 
caregiver. This match 
also supports the 
caregiver’s ability to 
respond and imitate 
your behavior.
Make sure your 
nonverbal language 
and proximity match 
the family norm.Associate your 
questions or 
interactions with the 
family’s experiences. 
Ask the caregiver 
about their well-
being, interests, and 
activities. 
Use open-ended 
questions that they 
can answer with the 
information they 
choose.Connect frequently, 
predictably, and in a 
comfortable space 
throughout the 
session.
Consistent 
opportunities to 
connect builds 
relationships. It’s not 
one experience but 
the accumulation of 
many.Learn about toxic 
stress, mental 
health, and trauma-
informed care.
Supporting 
executive 
functioning and 
self-regulation 
can be helpful for 
families and their 
relationships with 
their child.

--- Page 24 ---
Building Family Confidence and Competence
18 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualRelational Practices
• Listen and learn from the family
• Respect their beliefs, interests, and culture
• Focus on their priorities
• Share requested and relevant information  
and resources
• Match learning preferencesParticipatory Practices
• Join as a collaborator rather than a leader
• Build on strengths to achieve identified priorities
• Support the caregiver as an informed decision-maker
• Engage in opportunities that support and 
strengthen the caregiver’s skills
• Encourage problem solving and self-reflection
Dunst & Trivette, 2009
Engages and 
leads activities 
with the child 
before you set 
them upRecognizes and 
uses various 
intervention 
strategies while 
embedding 
targets in 
routines that 
work for themInitiates 
conversation, 
establishing 
reciprocal 
exchanges and 
sharing  
informationShares 
information  
about what is 
and isn’t working 
using your input 
for support or  
problem solvingLeads 
development  
of an action 
planResponds to 
your questions 
and comments, 
increasing the 
frequency of 
responses over 
time, sharing  
their ideasYou know it’s working when the caregiver:
You ask a question, but the caregiver doesn’t 
respond or doesn’t share any relevant family 
information AND  you do not follow up with 
additional or clarifying questions or comments.
Asking a question is a good start, but it’s not sufficient. 
You should follow up as soon as the caregiver is 
comfortable in the session, preferably before session 
planning. While important, family updates during the 
action plan do not enhance your ability as a provider to 
support the caregiver in the session. PartialPartial
You inquire about the 
caregiver and family and 
receive a substantive and 
relevant response. 
A shrug of the shoulders 
or a “nothing much” is not 
a substantive response. A 
description of a neighbor’s 
new car is not a relevant 
response. Try again.  YesYes
You ask about the 
family and either do 
not get a response or 
the caregiver jumps to 
intervention updates, 
but you return with 
follow-up questions 
regarding the family 
that result in a 
substantive answer.YesYesGetting to Yes in KI-1Building caregiver capacity to embed intervention that supports the child’s learning includes using both relationship 
and participation-based capacity-building practices and principles. It isn’t the relationship or the participation that 
promotes the caregiver’s capacity; it’s the intersection between these practices and principles and how you use them.KI-1Gathers updates on the caregiver and family -  listens and encourages caregiver 
reflection
How do I prepare to “meet the family” and learn about them? 
Am I aware of my attitudes and perspectives that could impact my home visiting practices? What 
information would help me increase my knowledge and skills to support each family?Reflection

--- Page 25 ---
Asks the caregiver to update intervention implementation 
since the last visit - listens, encourages caregiver reflection, 
and sets up problem solving as needed
While gathering child intervention updates is a familiar home 
visiting practice, it is also an opportunity to strengthen the 
importance of the caregiver’s role in their child’s learning 
and development. Listening to the child and family’s recent 
experiences with embedding intervention throughout their 
day provides updates on the child’s current status as well as 
the caregiver’s use of the identified strategies and routines. 
Asking reflection questions presents an opportunity to 
actively engage the caregiver in self-reflection. The caregiver 
shares stories about their child practicing their targets in the 
family activities, describing what they tried, what worked, 
what didn’t, what the child enjoyed, and which strategies 
were the most helpful. 
Using open-ended questions encourages caregivers to 
reflect on other routines and activities they have tried beyond 
their action plan. Problem solving exchanges facilitate an 
understanding of the family’s unique perspective and ideas. 
This builds their confidence about what they do and promotes 
enthusiasm for what’s next. Updates are a time for them to 
reflect on what they have been doing, even when the steps 
forward may seem small.Setting the Stage
Looks Like
Asking open-ended questions to encourage the caregiver 
to share updates on the child’s intervention from their 
perspective (e.g., “Tell me what you worked on with Keisha.”).
Encouraging the caregiver to share more specific updates 
on the targets, strategies, and routines by asking follow-up 
questions (e.g., “You said he’s eating better. What made it 
better? Was it more bites, new textures, different foods?”).
Listening to learn how the caregiver adapted the strategies 
and routines to fit in their day and the family’s life (e.g., “You 
said you included Yusef in his brother’s morning routines, 
and it worked well. How did you decide to try that?”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Asking for specific updates on each target by asking multiple 
yes/no questions (e.g., “Did you try the new bottle? How 
often? How many ounces did he drink at each feeding?”).
Listening to responses passively (e.g., “That’s nice, now let’s 
get started with today’s plan.”) rather than encouraging the 
caregiver to share what strategies they used and how they 
worked in different routines.
Responding with comments that close a conversation 
rather than showing respect for the caregiver’s efforts when 
they do not share updates (e.g., “Oh, that’s ok.”).Examples of Key Indicator 2. 
• “How do you feel about Elliot’s targets 
since our last visit?”
• “Tell me about Aditi. What’s been 
happening with her plan?”
• “Last week, you waited before giving 
Carlos more apples at snack so he could 
ask for another one. How did you use wait 
time this week?”
• “You said you wanted to create more 
opportunities for Juliette to practice 
rolling. What did you try?”
• “I am watching Kahlil help you pick up the 
blocks. That’s new! Tell me about it!”
• “I’m listening to the list of routines you 
tried this week. You added some new 
ones! What did you learn? Are there any 
that you want to talk about?”
• “I’m anxious to hear about your trip 
to the park to practice walking across 
different surfaces. What did you try?”2
19 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualUpdates are a time to celebrate 
recent successes, share stories, and 
begin to plan for the next steps.

--- Page 26 ---
Considerations for Key Indicator 2. 
Building a relationship takes time.  Gathering meaningful 
updates on the previous action plan will become easier as you 
learn more about the family’s beliefs and values, perspective 
on early intervention, and priorities for their child. The more 
you know about the family, the more you learn how to support 
them in the session and to develop the next action plan.
Be sure to explain the purpose of the updates  and how they 
are used when developing the session plan and monitoring 
the child’s progress. Some caregivers are quiet because they 
are unfamiliar with the process and need encouragement, 
while others may feel uncomfortable until they get to know 
you. Reminding the caregiver of the confidentiality of the 
information may be helpful.
Life happens to all of us.  Family or friends may visit unexpectedly, the car breaks down, and kids get sick... 
plans change. Use this time during the visit to reflect with caregivers on what they do rather than what they 
don’t. Following up with reflection questions and problem solving supports caregivers to identify strategies to 
use when plans do not go as anticipated.
Asking the family about intervention implementation sends the message  that you believe in them and 
reaffirms their role in supporting their child’s learning. Encourage them to share what they believe is important, 
even if it doesn’t match the previous activity schedule or action plan. It’s important to remember that schedules 
are not routines. Teaching and learning interactions can occur almost anywhere or any time when caregivers 
understand how to embed intervention.
Listening to what worked or didn’t as the caregiver shares updates can inform providers  about possible 
places, times, or materials to adapt to the environment for new targets or revisions of the current ones. Listen 
closely and reflect on what wasn’t said that may also be relevant. Focused follow-up questions can provide 
valuable and time-saving information. 
Updates may lead to ideas for new family and child outcomes. Be sure to listen carefully to the caregiver 
and capture their interests, wishes, or ideas that come from the discussion. Take the time to brainstorm ideas 
they tried that can be useful throughout the session. 
Updates may also lead to opportunities to share additional information or resources, enabling the provider 
to move the exchange from updates to the discussion of priorities naturally in KI-3.
Setting the Stage Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-2. Asks the caregiver 
to update intervention 
implementation since 
the last visit - listens, 
encourages caregiver 
reflection, and sets up 
problem solving as neededScore Yes if the provider 
asks or makes comments 
AND  the caregiver 
responds with intervention 
updates on the targets, 
routines, or strategies on 
the plan OR if the caregiver 
initiates the update and the 
provider responds.Score Partial if the provider 
asks and follows up with 
another prompt but does 
not get an intervention 
update related to the 
plan OR if the caregiver’s 
response is not specific 
and the provider does not 
follow up.Score N/O if there is no 
clear request for updates 
related to intervention 
implementation and the 
caregiver does not share 
updates.
KI-2Asks the caregiver to update intervention implementation since the last visit - 
listens, encourages caregiver reflection, and sets up problem solving as needed
20 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 27 ---
KI-2Asks the caregiver to update intervention implementation since the last visit - 
listens, encourages caregiver reflection, and sets up problem solving as needed
Connecting the KIs: Making the most of KI-2
The Family 5Q question, Is it working , can also help you gather progress data for 
KI-2 documentation.
Scaffold questions to support the 
caregiver sharing updates. For example, 
start with an open-ended comment: 
“Tell me about mealtime.” Follow up 
with an information-based question 
to learn more: “What foods did he try 
this week?” Based on the caregiver’s 
responses, you may add reflective 
follow-up questions: “What do you think 
made those foods interesting for him? 
How did you encourage him to try?” 
Information gathered can be used for 
session planning.
21 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualRemind the caregiver of the targets, routines, and strategies to support them when they share 
updates. Encourage them to add new things they tried as possible new routines (KI-9).Try transitioning from family updates (KI-1) to child updates (KI-2). 
Ex: “You mentioned a trip to Grandpa’s. How did Kenji do walking in this new environment?”
Use reflection questions (KI-10) to encourage the caregiver to describe what did or didn’t work as a 
follow-up to an update on a target. Problem solve how the strategies supported the caregiver and 
child or didn’t (KI-8).Capturing information from updates can give you a heads-up about developmental information (KI-
3) that can be helpful when preparing for KI-4. Be listening for information that the caregiver could 
benefit from for planning. 
Comment on the different activities and routines you heard mentioned during updates and inquire 
about the possibility of adding those to the KI-4. Updates are useful for identifying and expanding 
routines for generalization in KI-9. Asking about routines early in the session encourages thinking 
about more opportunities from the very beginning! 
Use the Family 5Q as a reminder and organizer for the update conversation. Some caregivers may 
feel more confident using a paper or electronic copy. Name the Qs to remind the caregiver that the 
targets are the What , strategies are the How, and the routine is the When/Where.KI-2 provides opportunities to gather and connect information that is useful throughout the session. Think 
about how integrating the other KIs can increase the meaningfulness and utility of KI-2.

--- Page 28 ---
KI-2Asks the caregiver to update intervention implementation since the last visit - 
listens, encourages caregiver reflection, and sets up problem solving as needed
Can KI-2 come before KI-1? Can they be done at the same time?
Absolutely! Sometimes, caregivers are ready to share child updates as soon as you get there. They are expecting 
that question. You can insert questions about the family updates during or after the child updates (e.g., “It’s exciting 
to hear that Grandpa could tell Olivia was talking more. How did the trip to Grandpa’s go for you? You mentioned 
looking forward to it during the last visit.”). You can also follow up with a general, “So, how are you feeling today?” 
or “What’s new with the family?”?
Can I collect updates during the session while I’m coaching?
Gathering more detailed or focused update information while reflecting or problem solving during or after a routine 
can certainly be helpful. However, without initial updates, the targets, routines, and strategies identified in KI-4 may not 
be accurate. If you are collecting updates while coaching in a routine, then you are likely using the general  coaching 
strategy, information sharing, rather than the specific  coaching strategies that increase the child’s and caregiver’s 
opportunities to practice. Gathering updates throughout the session can result in more time in conversation than 
coaching. Don’t get stuck spending too much time on updates.?
I like getting to the updates quickly, so I ask simple, direct questions. What’s 
wrong with that?
Updates give the caregiver opportunities to share their voice. They own the updates! These early conversations, 
supported by you as needed, establish the caregiver’s participation, which in turn leads to informed decision-making. 
This is a collaborative process. If you ask simple, direct, or yes-no questions, the answers may omit valuable examples 
and insights that could impact the session. They are a missed opportunity for the caregiver to gain confidence by 
sharing ideas to guide decision-making. It is also important to make sure the question format you use is comfortable 
and culturally responsive to the caregiver. You may find you need to ask more specific follow-up questions after the 
caregiver shares their information.?KI-2 Questions and Answers
22 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualWhere do the child’s health and medical updates go? What about other child 
information we typically gather, such as childcare updates, transition updates, etc.?
You should continue to collect general updates while setting the stage and document them as needed. However, this 
information is not included on the FGRBI Key Indicators Checklist and scoring rubric. This represents a change from 
previous guidance, where general child information was often included in KI-1—child and family updates. Now that 
KI-1 is focusing on the family, these types of child updates, while important, are generally not included in the actual 
fidelity scoring. KI-1 addresses family updates, while KI-2 focuses on the child’s intervention updates. However, there 
is one important exception. When an IFSP outcome and subsequent targets address the child’s health, referrals, or 
program information, they are included in scoring for KI-2, but only if there is a specific target identified for the child 
or family on the action plan.?
What strategies can I use to make sure I am individualizing my update conversations for each family 
based on their experiences and priorities? 
How can I gather update information with open-ended questions rather than asking short-answer or yes-
no information questions? How can I use follow-up questions to add specifics if they are needed?Reflection

--- Page 29 ---
Conversations with the caregiver are fundamental to family guided 
practices. Information and ideas relevant to the child’s intervention 
plan are shared, questions are asked and answered, and caregivers 
are encouraged to participate and make decisions about their 
priorities and plans. The connections between the child’s status, IFSP 
outcomes, and the family’s vision for their child are verified during 
the conversations. Adding specific developmental information, 
making connections to the child’s current learning targets, and 
discussing new or revised targets are all topics for KI-3.  
Parents may need support to see how the pieces for embedding 
intervention work together. Explaining why specific targets are 
necessary, why some strategies are more effective than others, and 
why there are more opportunities in certain routines provides the 
family with information that helps them make informed decisions. 
They can use this information while planning for the session, during practice and problem solving, and when 
planning between visits. The adult learning principle that emphasizes situating information sharing in the moment 
and environment where it is relevant is at the core of KI-3.Shares information about child development and family 
interests - connects learning targets to functional outcomes 
and IFSP priorities to increase caregiver knowledge and 
resourcesSetting the Stage
3
23 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualGathering and giving information is 
an ongoing, dynamic learning process 
between families and providers.
Woods & Lindeman, 2008Looks Like
Encouraging the caregiver to understand and interpret the 
child’s skills as they develop (e.g., “Did you notice how Cori 
looked to see if you were watching her drop her cookie? Do 
you think she wanted your attention?”).
Supporting the teaching and learning relationship between 
the child and caregiver by offering developmental 
information, materials, or intervention suggestions related to 
the routine that links to long-term outcomes and priorities 
(e.g., “Since reading books is a favorite routine for you and 
Jowan, let’s look at the developmental word list for ideas of 
words you want him to practice in the books.”).
Connecting the IFSP outcome to the “right-sized” targets 
to help caregivers make decisions about the next steps 
for their child’s plan (e.g., “You stated in the IFSP that you 
want Evan to wash his hands. Small steps like rubbing soap 
on his hands, or drying them could be ‘right-sized’ targets 
that build to the outcome.”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Giving developmental information that contains jargon, 
overly technical terms, or is delivered in an “expert” way that 
does not connect to the family’s goals.
Describing milestones or intervention strategies for caregivers 
to use without asking for caregiver input.
Sharing general developmental information that is not 
connected directly to the child’s IFSP outcome and their 
current targets.
Examples of Key Indicator 3. 
• “Yemina’s IFSP outcome is to get ready 
for childcare in a good mood. You just 
shared that giving her choices helped her 
to get dressed and pack her diaper bag. 
Choices help because it gives her a turn to 
communicate with you and gives her a job 
to do that helps her participate. Are there 
other morning routines where choices could 
be included?” 
• “You told me you were surprised that Theo 
got his diaper and wipes when you asked. 
At about 15 months, children understand 
many words even though they are not saying 
them. Theo is learning words when you label 
them as you use them, such as in his diaper 
routine. Your IFSP outcome is for him to talk; 
however, he also needs to understand words 
that have meaning for your family first. 
Would you like to work on understanding 
more words?” 

--- Page 30 ---
Considerations for Key Indicator 3. 
An essential component of KI-3 is sharing developmental 
information and rationale  to support embedding intervention in 
the family’s routines and activities. Families count on you to provide 
pertinent developmental information that helps to establish priorities 
for the “right-sized” targets and a rationale for which intervention 
strategies and routines to use.
The information gathered in updates informs you about what 
the family may need to know to identify the next targets, routines, 
and strategies to practice with you during the session. It provides 
opportunities to share how skills are learned by using them in 
functional everyday routines. Connecting the dots between 
gathering updates and sharing developmental information before 
the session plan helps caregivers understand how the “right-sized” 
targets will lead to the ultimate outcome.  
Developmental information can show how individual or clusters of behaviors contribute to the larger IFSP 
outcome or the sequence of steps for learning complex skills. Families may identify walking and talking as priorities 
without knowing the developmental sequence to apply to their child’s learning. Sharing information supports them 
to make informed decisions.
Sharing information in multiple formats, such as written materials, videos, or other media, supports adults as 
learners. Be prepared to scaffold information for families. One of your key roles as a provider is to offer “just enough” 
information to caregivers at “just the right time.” Sharing developmental checklists to illustrate the child’s learning 
or sharing a video of the child using new skills can help the caregiver understand what the child is doing now and 
what is coming next. Keeping the message focused on the specific targets they are working on and what would be 
the immediate next step makes it easier to understand and remember. Providing developmental information helps 
families celebrate learning specific targets that will help achieve the child’s more significant outcomes. Little steps 
mean so much!
Family priorities change and should be checked regularly  to enhance the family’s active participation and make 
sure you are in tune with the family’s interests. The more meaningful and relevant the learning targets and routines 
are, the more the child and family can engage and participate in their typical day. A part of KI-3 is to check in on 
family priorities to ensure they are being addressed in a way that works for them. KI-3Shares information about child development and family interests - connects 
learning targets to functional outcomes and IFSP priorities to increase caregiver 
knowledge and resources
24 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualSetting the Stage Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-3. Shares information 
about child development 
and family interests - 
connects learning targets 
to functional outcomes and 
IFSP priorities to increase 
caregiver knowledge and 
resourcesScore Yes if the provider 
shares 3 or more examples 
of developmental 
information or rationale 
connected to a target, 
routine, strategy, or family 
priority, with at least 1 
example linked to an IFSP 
outcome. Score Partial if the provider 
refers to the IFSP and 
family priorities but 
does not explicitly add 
developmental information 
or rationale for the targets, 
routines, or strategies OR 
if the provider provides 
relevant information but 
does not link to the IFSP OR 
if there are fewer than three 
examples with one linked to 
the IFSP given. Score N/O if the IFSP 
outcomes are not discussed 
and no developmental 
information or rationale 
related to the current 
targets, routines, or 
strategies are offered.


--- Page 31 ---
KI-3Shares information about child development and family interests - connects 
learning targets to functional outcomes and IFSP priorities to increase caregiver 
knowledge and resources
25 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualCaregivers may focus on the major developmental domains for their IFSP outcomes  and not include other 
high-impact developmental outcomes (i.e., learning targets that promote child engagement and learning 
overall). They may need information and reminders on how important interactions can be for the child’s learning. 
Encouraging caregivers to think about “why” small moments of positive interaction (e.g., looking at books or 
singing songs) supports their child’s learning. Sharing information on social-emotional development, self-regulation, 
communication, problem solving, and adaptive skills gives caregivers opportunities to understand their child now 
and how to plan for the future. Understanding how early interactions impact later development can be an ongoing 
conversation included in KI-3.
• Shares developmental information 
to support identification of new or 
revised targets
• Demonstrates sequence of “right-
sized” targets to accomplish IFSP 
outcomes
• Explains value of intervention 
strategies and routines
Provides Why info to caregiver 
to support decision-makingConnects IFSP 
outcome to 
current and 
potential targets
IFSP  
OutcomeReviews and 
updates family 
prioritiesUpdates & 
Priorities Links the updates 
to the session  
plan
Developmental 
Information on 
RationaleKI-3
KI-3 and the Family 5Q
KI-3 can be described as the “glue” between Setting the Stage and the Family 5Q. As the caregivers share updates 
on their family and the child’s intervention plan, the next steps for targets (What ), routines ( When/Where ), and 
intervention strategies ( How) are formulated. As a provider, you share developmental information ( Why) related to 
the caregiver’s descriptions of what the action plan (KI-12) “looked like” ( Is it working ) as they embedded intervention 
between visits. The Family 5Q can be a useful framework for sharing information with caregivers that will assist in 
developing the session plan (KI-4).Another way to use KI-3 is to share Why information within or immediately following the routine. This gives 
caregivers an opportunity to discuss the target, routine, or strategy while embedding the intervention. For example, 
you can use KI-3 while coaching by explaining why a particular strategy works in addition to coaching how the 
strategy is used. Information sharing does not take the place of specific coaching but can be an addition to explain 
why the intervention strategy is a good match for the child’s target or routine.
Sharing information once is often not enough.  Sharing information during Setting the Stage and while coaching 
in routines during Problem Solving and Planning supports the development of a cohesive and informed action plan 
led by the caregiver. Plan for opportunities to describe how the caregiver can support their child’s learning by sharing 
information connected to the targets, routines, strategies, or the family’s interests at least three to five times per visit.
Development is affected by the family’s environment and experiences.  Understanding how the family’s beliefs 
and expectations are similar to or different from current mainstream perspectives is important for intervention 
planning. Exchanging information and rationale for embedding in the family’s routines should occur as new targets 
and strategies are identified.
Woods et al., 2018
What
 When/Where
 How
 Is it working
 Why

--- Page 32 ---
KI-3Shares information about child development and family interests - connects 
learning targets to functional outcomes and IFSP priorities to increase caregiver 
knowledge and resources
KI-3 and the IFSP
Research has shown that families often don’t remember their IFSP outcomes or how they are used to support their 
child’s learning unless they have opportunities to discuss and review them. The initial IFSP is often completed while 
the family is learning about their child’s development, potential delays or disabilities, and what the early intervention 
program can do to support them. With the commitment to family participation delineated by the “F” in the IFSP , it is 
important for providers to connect the family’s early decision-making to their ongoing engagement. A visual may aid 
their understanding of the connections between the original outcome and the current session’s target.
26 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual
3+ examples of 
information sharing 
within the session 
related to the child’s 
current plan11
1 example must 
connect the 
IFSP outcome to 
developmental 
information or rationale 
for strategies or 
routines currently used22
Information sharing is 
reciprocal. Caregivers 
are encouraged to share 
ideas, ask questions, 
and make comments 
about targets, routines, 
and strategies33
Examples of KI-3 can 
occur in SS, during or 
between routines (KI-6), 
while problem solving 
about strategies (KI-8) or 
routines (KI-9), and the 
action plan (KI-12)44Getting to Yes in KI-3IFSP Outcome Goal Target
Families report it’s difficult to remember the details of the IFSP . A brief reminder during the session can help the 
caregivers reflect on their initial priorities to determine their continued importance and the child’s progress. For 
families familiar with EI, who know and trust their providers and feel comfortable with their child’s progress, a quick 
check on their priorities and a comment connecting to the IFSP can be a meaningful reminder to focus the session. 
Taking time for reflection supports the caregiver’s understanding of the information shared in KI-3. Asking caregivers 
to think about their priorities or the next steps in their child’s developmental progress toward the outcome gives 
them an opportunity to discuss how they see it working for their child and their family. Identifying what’s next is great, 
but figuring out how to support their ability to apply the ideas may take more discussion and problem solving.
To deepen the caregiver’s 
understanding, try:
• How will this target fit into your 
child’s and family’s schedule?
• When you close your eyes and 
see your child working on their 
target, what do you see you 
doing to help them?To increase opportunities for 
practice, try:
• Which routines and activities do 
you think would be easiest to 
embed their targets in first?
• Where else could this skill be 
useful? Who else could help?To identify potential hassles, try:  
• What will you have to change, 
add, or do differently to embed 
this target comfortably?
• What will help your child 
participate and enjoy practice?Making the Most of KI-3
Knowing that each caregiver’s information needs are different, how do I choose information and “match” 
the right amount at the right time to support the caregiver?
What strategies do I use to encourage the caregiver to ask questions, share ideas, and make decisions 
about next steps before we make the session plan?Reflection

--- Page 33 ---
Building consensus on a plan for the session at the outset helps to 
ensure the intervention is intentionally connected to the family priorities 
and the next steps for the child’s learning. In KI-4, you support the 
caregiver in specifying the targets and strategies for the routines or 
activities for the day. It also clarifies the expectations for the child’s 
use of the target within the routine or how they envision the child’s 
participation. Collaborating with the caregiver at the beginning of 
the session to identify what to do, when, and where ensures that the 
caregiver and child will have opportunities for practice that support 
them between sessions. It also decreases the reliance on plans 
developed by providers based on their knowledge and experiences, 
rather than the caregiver’s beliefs of what will help them support their 
child. It shifts the conversation on the session plan to the provider asking the question, “What can I do to support 
you in embedding his targets in the routines that work best for you?”
The session plan helps preview what the parent wants their child to do and primes them to think about how they will 
use the identified strategies in their routines. It’s an opportunity for you to review the parents’ understanding of the 
targets and strategies to embed during the visit, i.e., what they want to happen as they discuss it with you. Knowing 
what the caregiver is planning to do can facilitate observation of the routine prior to coaching and encourage the 
caregiver’s decision-making about the plan.
Jointly identifies or clarifies the targets, routines, and 
strategies for the session - facilitates caregiver participation 
and decision-making in the discussionSetting the Stage
Examples of Key Indicator 4. 
• Provider asks, “You said that you 
want to start with reading books so 
Nelly can use words. What words 
are you thinking?” Mom responds, 
“She loves her new animal book. 
She knows her animal sounds but 
not their names.”
• Mom says, “I think we can roll the 
ball back and forth, put the toys in 
the bucket, and pull the clothes out 
of the dryer, so we take turns while 
we play and do chores.” 
• Dad says, “I know he can do more 
than I’ve been expecting. I want him 
to finish breakfast and get dressed 
without a meltdown. Then he can 
pick what he wants to play with.”
• Provider asks, “You said you wanted 
to increase her walking between 
activities instead of carrying her. 
Where do you want to start?” Mom 
responds, “Downstairs first. Let’s 
try walking to the sink to wash her 
hands and back to the highchair for 
snack time. Then we can walk up to 
the playroom.”4
27 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualLooks Like
Asking questions based on updates and information sharing (e.g., 
“You said you think Morgan is ready to take your hand to walk to the 
car or in the store so he learns to stay with you during transitions. 
What strategies are you thinking of or want to try first?”).
Scaffolding to help caregivers make decisions about what takes place 
and when in the session (e.g., “You want Seraphina to pick up and 
hold objects when you are playing or pick up her food from the tray 
during snack time. Does that still sound good? What do you want to 
do first, play or have lunch? What materials do we need?”).
Summarizing and clarifying the How, What , and Where/When  to 
embed so the caregiver is ready for the routine (e.g., “Your plan is 
to let Brian choose the book. Then you will ask him to name pictures 
and expect a response. You will repeat and add a new word.”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Making comments that confirm the provider’s agenda (e.g., “How 
about we play in the living room and work with his puzzles? That 
worked well last week, and they are laying right over there.”).
Asking vague questions that are difficult for caregivers to answer or 
are not specific to the child’s target without any follow-up (e.g., “What 
would you like to do today? What do you think will help the most?”).
Engaging in provider-led discussions that focus on child skills or 
therapeutic interventions that do not occur in the context of a routine 
(e.g., “Tyler will walk with two-handed support for three feet on two 
of three trials.”).

--- Page 34 ---
Considerations for Key Indicator 4. 
The session plan is jointly developed  by the caregiver and provider. Support for the caregiver in the planning 
process using updates and information should be flexible to meet the caregiver’s needs. You may summarize the 
ideas and next steps discussed during updates and information sharing so that the caregiver can identify the targets 
and routines for the session, or the caregiver may be confident identifying the next steps with less support from you. 
“Right-size” targets match each child’s developmental progression  with the specific next step to increase their 
use of the identified behavior. “Right-sized” targets are not too big or too small. The target is “right-sized” when the 
intervention strategies embedded by the caregiver can be decreased, and the child becomes more independent in 
its use. The child should be able to show progress as identified by the caregiver within a reasonable period. 
Routines include sufficient opportunities  for the caregiver to gain confidence using intervention strategies 
identified to support the child’s learning. Routines should be selected to match the specific targets and practice 
opportunities. Caregiving and play routines will have different opportunities for practice on targets. The caregiver-
identified routines in KI-4 should also expand the routine types and categories across the child and family’s day to 
ensure that practice occurs where the targets are functional and meaningful.
Intervention strategies may be identified in the session plan if the caregiver has preferences. Additional strategies 
may be coached after observation and caregiver practice as needed. Intervention strategies the caregiver uses may 
be expanded to support the child’s learning needs for the target and may also vary between routine types. Problem 
solving around instructional strategies (KI-8) and practice within routines (KI-6) will occur throughout the session.
Session plans can change as the session evolves.  After practice in a routine, the targets may need to be revised. 
What initially seemed “right-sized” may actually be too large, too small, or not the right match for the routine the 
caregiver prioritized. The identified routines may need more opportunities for practice or may not motivate the child 
in the moment. After observation and initial coaching, revisions may be identified, and the caregiver and provider. 
Remember, the plan is just that... a plan. While it does guide the session, it should also be flexible to address the 
child and caregiver’s priorities.
The targets must be specific  so the caregiver can embed strategies to support the child’s practice. General goals, 
such as using more words, climbing stairs, or playing with toys, can be more difficult because of their vagueness. 
Which words, how many stairs, or what actions are developmentally appropriate to use with the toys are questions that 
caregivers need the answers to before embedding intervention strategies. “Right-sized” and specific targets, such as 
labeling snack foods (e.g., milk, cheese, crackers), requesting more cookies, bringing food to his mouth with a spoon, 
or sitting with balance in a highchair, add the specificity that supports the caregiver’s use of intervention strategies.KI-4Jointly identifies or clarifies the targets, routines, and strategies for the session 
- facilitates caregiver participation and decision-making in the discussion
28 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualSetting the Stage Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-4. Jointly identifies 
or clarifies the targets, 
routines, and strategies 
for the session - facilitates 
caregiver participation 
and decision-making in 
the discussionScore Yes if the caregiver and 
provider discuss specific targets 
to embed in at least one routine, 
with the caregiver leading the 
decision-making process for at 
least 1 target AND  1 routine.
Strategies are included if they 
have been identifiedScore Partial if the provider 
leads the discussion and 
identification of specific 
targets, routines, and 
strategies OR only a 
specific target or a routine 
is identified for the plan.Score N/O if joint 
discussion on the session 
plan does not occur OR if 
only general statements 
about the session plan 
are made without the 
caregiver’s input.KI-1
 Family updatesKI-4
Target(s)
Routine(s)
Strategy(ies)KI-2
Child intervention 
updatesIFSP  
outcomesFamily prioritiesDevelopmental 
information 
supporting 
targetsKI-3

--- Page 35 ---
What do you do when...KI-4Jointly identifies or clarifies the targets, routines, and strategies for the session 
- facilitates caregiver participation and decision-making in the discussion
This is a good thing! You can discuss a big KI-4 plan for all the targets 
and routines or start with one KI-4 and develop a quick plan for each 
subsequent set of targets and routines. Encourage the caregiver 
to prioritize which targets and routines to start with and then move 
through each based on the caregiver’s and child’s interests and needs 
for support. An example of Clarisa’s KI-4 plan is provided below.A The child has 
several targets 
they are working 
on during each 
session?QFor many reasons, caregivers may be reluctant to offer their ideas or 
make decisions about what to do. Take some time to reflect on the 
caregivers’ experiences, culture, and confidence, as well as reflect on 
how you have explained coaching and communicated with them about 
your role. Coaching may be new to the caregiver, and more time is 
needed to build a relationship that supports your partnership. Scaffold 
and keep trying. Encourage their responses by using their ideas.AThe caregiver 
defers to you no 
matter how you ask 
the questions or 
make suggestions?Q
29 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualSupporting the Caregiver to Lead KI-4TargetStrategy
RoutineTarget Names objects 
“cookie,” 
“milk,” “cup,” 
“dog,” “cat”
Routines Book reading, 
snacks
Strategy Imitation, wait 
time, gesturesTarget Sitting with 
balance
Routines Toy play, social 
games
Strategy F2F & 
interesting 
toys, foods, 
encouragementTargets Takes bites from 
spoon, asks for 
more
Routines Meals, snacks
Strategy F2F, “sticky” 
foods, favorite 
spoon, wait timeClarisa’s KI-4
Review what was discussed in 
the updates and family priorities 
for the next steps. Use their 
examples and make connections 
to what they have already tried 
that did or didn’t work. Discuss 
how to expand or revise.Simplify your questions or use 
comments instead of questions to 
reduce the caregiver’s concerns about 
the right answer. Many adults want to 
answer the questions correctly… even 
when there is not one right answer, 
just good choices.  Give the caregiver time to 
respond. This is new territory and 
possibly an uncertain time for them 
and their child. Slow down, listen, 
and use your silence to let the 
caregiver know you want to hear 
their ideas of how to help them.  Scaffold systematically. If an open-ended question is too 
vague, break it down and share some options you have 
used and believe are workable. Offer 2-3 choices that 
are familiar to the caregiver that you have observed as a 
starting point. Make sure you do not choose or decide 
on the option without the caregiver’s input and ultimate 
decision. Repeat what you heard to clarify.Use a visual like a print resource, 
video clip, or last session’s action 
plan or role-play what it could 
look like as a concrete reference 
to build on. Break the routine 
down into steps where the target 
can be practiced.

--- Page 36 ---
KI-4Jointly identifies or clarifies the targets, routines, and strategies for the session 
- facilitates caregiver participation and decision-making in the discussion
30 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualProviders may feel as though the routines and targets are 
apparent to the caregiver, so it’s not necessary to name 
them in KI-4. This is especially true when the targets and 
routines are familiar. However, encouraging the caregiver 
to describe the plan takes only a few seconds and can lead 
to discussions on other routines or strategies to try.
Without a KI-4, the provider may assume they are on 
the same page as the caregiver, potentially reducing 
opportunities for coaching or feedback. Having a clear plan, 
especially when led by the caregiver, builds confidence 
and competence—our goal for coaching.Thoughts and Ideas About KI-4
From a Caregiver’s Perspective
From a Provider’s Perspective
“KI-4 is the most important KI in the whole list, I think. Once we have a plan, it is so much 
easier to coach, reflect, and problem solve. Without a plan, I felt like I was just going 
through the motions, coaching or asking questions to check them off the list. With a plan, 
I knew what to coach on and how to involve the caregiver in the session. It made so much 
more sense to both of us.”  -Livy
“I’ve worked with parents who change their minds in the middle of the session about what 
they think is important; everything seems important. When that happens, I bring them back 
to the updates and KI-4 to help them be systematic in embedding intervention so the child 
can have sufficient practice for learning. KI-4 holds the session together.”  -Ali
“I use my KI-4 as a setup for KIs 11 and 12. We work on the targets, routines, and strategies 
throughout the session and then decide what’s best to continue between sessions.” -Jeri
“I had the hardest time getting a KI-4. I’m not sure why, since it is so obvious, but I did. 
Now, I can’t imagine not having one. I will say it is still harder when the caregiver isn’t used 
to participating. I think getting the caregiver involved early in the session is key. Get the 
caregiver participating in KIs 1-3 so it flows into KI-4.”  -Evelyn
What questions/comments can I use to connect KIs 1-3 to KI-4 so the session plan reflects the child’s 
next steps and the caregiver’s ideas of how to move forward? 
How will I know the KI-4 is specific enough for the caregiver to feel confident about what to do in the routine?Reflection At first, I didn’t know where to start, how to 
go about things, or how to make it work for my 
child, but now I’m more confident. As I learned 
more, I shared more. She asked questions 
and listened to me. She asked what I thought 
worked and which routines would be best for 
me. I like that we talk about the targets and plan 
what to do so everybody’s on the same page.

--- Page 37 ---
During observation, quietly and unobtrusively sit back while the caregiver and 
child participate in a routine identified for embedding intervention. The focus 
is on the interactions between the caregiver and the child in the moment. 
Continue to observe without interrupting as the routine is completed or for at 
least 20 seconds prior to sharing strengths-based feedback with the caregiver. 
The observation and feedback process identifies the strategies the caregiver 
is already using or could use to 
support the child’s participation. 
The strengths-based feedback 
serves as the starting point for the 
coaching that follows.Intentional observation, the purposeful watching and listening 
to gather meaningful and measurable descriptions of the 
caregiver and child’s interactions, is an evidence-based coaching 
practice used widely in early intervention for multiple purposes. 
Observation offers information on the child, their engagement 
in the routine, use of their developmental skills in a functional 
context, and responses to the caregiver. In addition, observation 
shows how the caregiver supports the child, what intervention 
strategies they use, what their expectations are for the child’s 
responses, and how they provide feedback to the child. While 
observing, you can systematically review what is and isn’t working 
for the child and caregiver and how they support each other’s 
responses. 
Observes the caregiver/child interaction in routines -   
provides strengths-based feedback and builds on dyad interaction5
Examples of Key Indicator 5. 
• “Since you identified hand washing 
as a new routine, can I watch so I 
can learn how you do it?”
• “You said you felt stuck with 
rolling over. I’d like to see how 
she responds when you try. 
Watching what she does and how 
you help her helps me problem 
solve with you.”
• “You mentioned a fun tickle game 
during updates that you do with 
her. Can you show me what that 
looks like as a possible play routine 
for today?”
• “When I watch a routine or 
playtime, I learn what Jing-Mei is 
doing with your help. That helps 
me learn what’s working and what 
we can try next.”Looks Like
Positioning self for easy observation without interrupting or intruding 
upon the dyad’s interactions or participation (e.g., “I’ll watch while 
you help him get dressed, and then we can talk about what you 
think he could do next.”).
Transitioning from the session plan (KI-4) into observation on the 
routine the caregiver identifies (e.g., “You identified book reading 
as a routine for imitating words and actions today. I’d like to watch 
for a little bit to learn what is working.”).
Observing naturally occurring routines and sharing feedback with 
the caregiver (e.g., “I noticed he helped clean up after his snack.”). 
Doesn’t Look Like
Playing or practicing with the child while the parent observes (e.g., 
child-directed intervention).
Telling the caregiver you want to observe routines so that you can 
make recommendations about how they could be improved.
Observing without connecting child and family priorities to goals, 
outcomes, or family strengths, and not providing feedback on what 
the caregiver is doing that works for them.To acquire knowledge, one must 
study; but to acquire wisdom, one 
must observe.
Marilyn Vos SavantMcCollum & Yates, 1994
Child
CaregiverDyad
Provider
TriadObservation and Opportunities to Embed
31 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual

--- Page 38 ---
Considerations for Key Indicator 5. 
At least one example of KI-5  is expected to be on 
the routine(s) identified by the caregiver in KI-4 and 
should be completed before coaching. This immediately 
provides an opportunity for the caregiver to take the lead 
in interacting with the child in a routine they planned. It 
gives the provider an opportunity to sit back and observe 
what the caregiver is already doing to support the child.
Observations in KI-5 that occur before coaching 
should be 20+ seconds  to ensure the caregiver and 
child have sufficient opportunities to interact around the 
target(s) embedded in the routine. Some routines, such 
as diaper change, may not last 20 seconds. To increase 
observation time, you may want to observe the setup and finish of the routine or the transition to the next activity to 
gather sufficient information. If you still do not have a rich observation, you will want to identify another routine for 
an additional observation before coaching. 
Before you begin, it is important to clarify the purpose of observation with caregivers.  Caregivers may wonder 
why you are watching them or feel a little uncomfortable if you do not explain. They may even change how they 
would typically interact without understanding the purpose. It can be helpful to have a few explanations ready, like, 
“I’m just going to watch how you wash hands to see how the activity flows,” or “Let me watch and see what he does 
when you give him a choice.”
Each observation should always include strengths-based feedback to the caregiver  about the caregiver/child 
interaction. Connecting the caregiver’s strategies to embed intervention into the child’s actions is a core capacity-
building strategy. When most adults hear that what they are doing helps their child, they are more likely to continue 
interacting with the child and using the strategies described in the feedback. Strengths-based, specific feedback 
after observation facilitates the relationship between you and the caregiver. The feedback you share demonstrates 
that you are listening and watching to support them positively, not to be critical. Describing what works for the dyad’s 
interactions decreases concerns about being observed and encourages their participation in coaching.
Observation helps the provider shift leadership to the caregiver. When observing, be careful not to participate 
or interrupt. Sit silently off to the side with the caregiver and child in full view while the caregiver takes the lead. 
This keeps you in the background, listening and learning about the strategies the caregiver uses and how the child 
responds, while the caregiver takes the lead.
KI-5Observes the caregiver/child interaction in routines - provides strengths-based 
feedback and builds on dyad interaction
32 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualObservation  
& OpportunitiesYes Partial Not Observed
KI-5. Observes the 
caregiver/child interaction 
in routines -  provides 
strengths-based feedback 
and builds on dyad 
interactionScore Yes if the provider 
intentionally observes 
caregiver-identified 
routine(s) for at least 20 
seconds AND  provides 
strengths-based feedback 
connecting the caregiver’s 
actions to the child’s 
participation.Score Partial if the provider 
observes caregiver-identified 
routine(s) for at least 20 seconds 
but does not provide strengths-
based feedback OR observes 
only routines not identified by 
the caregiver OR observes for 
less than 20 seconds but does 
provide feedback.Score N/O if intentional 
observation with 
feedback is not 
observed for at least 20 
seconds.

--- Page 39 ---
Making the Most of Observation: What can you learn?KI-5Observes the caregiver/child interaction in routines - provides strengths-based 
feedback and builds on dyad interaction
Hone your observation skills: 
What can you  
learn about the 
child?What can you  
learn about the 
caregiver?What can you  
learn about the 
interaction?
What can you  
learn about the 
routine?
33 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual• Observing provides you with areas of information to share with caregivers that connect child development, 
interaction between the dyad, and rationale for using strategies and routines. 
• Each observation is an opportunity to gather data on what the child is doing related to their target, the 
caregiver’s use of strategies, and the routine’s organization. 
• Your observations give you content to share with the caregiver and actual examples of what strategies are 
working so that you can build on the caregiver’s strengths.
• Observation facilitates learning about both the opportunities that are taken and those that are missed in the 
identified routine; it encourages you to think about what else could support the child’s learning or how the 
caregiver could adjust strategies to increase practice. 
• Your observation offers insight into what the caregiver understands about embedding intervention and what 
additional information would be helpful to them. 
• Observing also offers insight into the caregiver’s expectations for the child (e.g., when the caregiver is doing 
something for the child that they could do and be more independent, when the child may benefit from more 
support, and when the child could take on another productive role if it were offered).
• You can learn about the dyad’s affect in their interactions, their emotional give and take, the enjoyment, 
pacing, encouragements, consistency of support, redirections and repetitions, facial expressions, and 
animation—the expression of their feelings. Observation as a tool increases your understanding of the 
family beyond the child’s targets.Routine
Beginning & ending
Meaningful roles
Repetition
Predictable sequenceFunctional outcomesDyad
Position, proximity
Positive affect
Repair strategy
ReciprocityMutual attentionChild
Initiation & response
Interest & participation
EngagementJoint attentionCaregiver
Natural reinforcers
Expansions 
ResponsivenessSpecific intervention  
strategies
© 2000 FGRBI, Updated 2024

--- Page 40 ---
KI-5Observes the caregiver/child interaction in routines - provides strengths-based 
feedback and builds on dyad interaction
34 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualWhat happens if the routine doesn’t last 20 seconds?
Not all routines take the full 20 seconds, while others last several minutes. If a routine is likely to be too short, 
consider using the setup and clean-up as a part of the routine. If it’s easy to repeat, you can ask the caregiver to 
engage the child in multiple examples. For example, combing hair can be quick for a young child, but it can also 
be repeated if the child is engaged. Another caregiving routine, such as tooth brushing or hand washing, could be 
added if identified by the caregiver. On the other hand, if the routine is likely to be over 20 seconds (e.g., getting 
dressed), you may insert your feedback after completing part of the routine, such as putting the child’s shirt and pants 
on and before putting on his shoes so you can begin coaching on the rest of the dressing routine.?
What is the difference between observation (KI-5) and caregiver practice (KI-6)?
In general, observation means the caregiver interacts with the child, and you observe quietly. Observation in KI-5 
occurs after the routine and targets are identified in KI-4, but before  the coaching begins. Caregiver practice is a 
coaching strategy that occurs after you have coached the caregiver on the targets (e.g., direct teaching, guided 
practice with feedback, etc.) and the caregiver tries the strategies with the child during the routine. Caregiver practice 
is exactly what it sounds like—the caregiver practices embedding the strategies in the routine after  active coaching 
in KI-6. While caregiver practice can look a lot like observation because the caregiver and child are interacting while 
the provider is watching, the purpose is to further refine the coaching that has already occurred in KI-6 rather than to 
plan for which coaching strategies to use as in KI-5. ?
How much time do I spend observing in the session?
Time spent observing will vary for each dyad depending on the amount needed to support and expand coaching on 
the targets and strategies. During observation, you learn what the caregiver and child are already doing as a starting 
place for coaching. Observations should occur for each routine to inform your coaching and to provide opportunities 
for caregivers to reflect on the targets and strategies to use. Observation guides (not replaces) your coaching, which 
is the emphasis of your session.?What about observation on routines that occur and could potentially be useful for 
coaching, but are not identified in KI-4?
Incidental observations that occur during the session also offer valuable information about the family’s routines and 
identify potential new ones for embedding strategies. For instance, after having a snack, the child’s sticky hands 
may lead to another observation opportunity during a handwashing routine. It provides opportunities for feedback, 
problem solving, and planning. While washing hands, the provider may observe a fun mirror game that the caregiver 
and child play, leading to more ideas for future routines or strategies. Observation is valuable beyond the initial KI-5 
for the routine identified in KI-4. You should be attentive to both what is planned and what happens organically. 
However, remember that caregiver-identified routines are used for KI-5 first to make sure the caregiver knows which 
targets and strategies to focus on.?KI-5 Questions and Answers
Reflection
What strategies do you use after observing to increase caregiver competence and confidence? 
How do you remind yourself to look beyond the child’s developmental skills and look at their softer skills 
important to learning (e.g., initiations of interaction, repair strategies, persistence, amount, and balance 
of turn-taking)?
How do you make sure your strengths-based feedback focuses on the caregiver/child interactions? 

--- Page 41 ---
Uses multiple coaching strategies matched to caregiver and 
child behaviors in multiple caregiver-identified routines -  
scaffolds and repeats to build competence and confidenceObservation and Opportunities to Embed
6
Opportunities to Embed include two interrelated 
practices: 1) using specific coaching strategies to 
support the caregiver’s learning and 2) embedding in 
caregiver-identified everyday routines and activities. 
As with all FGRBI practices, the family is an active 
participant and decision-maker in the process, which is 
individualized for their family, the learning preferences 
of the caregiver(s), and the outcomes and specific 
targets for the child. Encourage the family to identify 
routines that fit into their schedule, occur consistently, 
and have outcomes for the child.
Coaching occurs in the caregiver-identified routines, 
reflecting their everyday activities and priorities. 
Specific coaching strategies that match the caregiver’s 
knowledge and ability to provide opportunities to 
embed are used to support the caregiver. Specific 
coaching strategies (including caregiver practice) are 
incorporated systematically and with sufficient frequency 
in different types of routines within the session to build 
caregiver competence and the child’s learning. Including 
reflection and problem solving in coaching strategies 
increases caregiver decision-making about what words 
work for them.
Examples of Key Indicator 6. 
• “Your facial expressions, gestures, and words can 
encourage him to take a turn. Try reaching out 
or pointing at the truck, smile, and talk excitedly 
when you tell him to roll the truck to you.”  
(Direct Teaching)
• “Watch me help Akia roll over. First, I position 
her on her side and bring her leg over just a little 
so gravity helps. Then, I’ll wait and talk to her 
to encourage her to finish the job. See, she is 
coming over on her own. Are you ready to try?” 
(Demonstration with Narration)
• “What do you think would happen if you tried 
sitting across from Ollie rather than holding him 
during dressing so he can see you and help pull 
his shirt, socks, and pants on?” (Guided Practice)
• “Lia likes rolling the ball back and forth with you. 
See her smile and the way she leans forward into 
the action? What could you try to see if she will 
reach or come to you for the ball?” (Reflection)
35 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualLooks Like
Demonstrating and explaining a strategy and then 
asking the parent to join you to practice (e.g., showing 
Mom the proper distance to hold the spoon for the 
child to be successful in reaching to grasp, and then 
encouraging her to try during snack).
Coaching in different types of routines multiple times 
during the visit to ensure the caregiver is comfortable 
using the strategies they have identified (e.g., 
coaching during play, picking up toys, reading books, 
washing hands, and feeding the cat).
Incorporating specific coaching strategies, then 
gradually reducing the support to the caregiver so 
they can practice and gain confidence in their ability 
to use the intervention strategies in routines.
Doesn’t Look Like
Providing a list of opportunities the caregiver could 
use between visits to work with the child without 
coaching (e.g., “You can work on making choices at 
snack, getting dressed, bath time, and with blocks or 
puzzles.”).
Demonstrating a strategy for the caregiver, but then 
forgetting to turn the interaction back to them for 
caregiver practice.
Coaching during a single routine or only in one routine 
category without supporting the caregiver to embed 
opportunities throughout the day in other routines 
and activities that are part of the family’s life.

--- Page 42 ---
KI-6Uses multiple coaching strategies matched to caregiver and child behaviors in 
multiple caregiver-identified routines -  scaffolds and repeats to build competence 
and confidence
Observation  
& OpportunitiesYes Partial Not Observed
KI-6. Uses multiple 
coaching strategies 
matched to caregiver 
and child behaviors 
in multiple caregiver-
identified routines - 
scaffolds and repeats to 
build competence and 
confidenceScore Yes if the provider 
uses at least 3 specific 
coaching strategies 
matched to the caregiver’s 
participation in each of at 
least 3 caregiver-identified 
routines from 2-3 different 
routine categories.Score Partial if the provider uses 
1-2 specific coaching strategies 
matched to the caregiver’s 
participation in caregiver-
identified routines OR if the 
specific coaching strategies 
do not match the caregiver’s 
learning needs OR if coaching 
occurs in fewer than 2 different 
routine categories.Score N/O if the 
coaching strategies 
observed are not 
different OR not 
matched to the 
caregiver’s participation 
AND  do not occur in 
the context of caregiver-
identified routine(s).
36 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualConsiderations for Key Indicator 6. 
Coaching in various routines across different routine categories  makes the intervention more likely to occur when 
the schedules and commitments change for busy families. Caregiver priorities often focus on the necessary caregiving, 
chores, and work of the family that keeps them going.
Because caregivers learn through active participation,  the majority of the home visit should be spent coaching 
caregivers in various routines, followed by problem solving and reflecting on the strategies to support the caregiver 
and child. Be sure to provide adequate opportunity.
Coaching strategies should be used to promote caregiver leadership and mastery.  The goal of coaching is for 
the caregivers to be independent and fluent in using strategies. To do this, caregivers will need multiple practice 
opportunities in various routines using different coaching strategies that increase their ability to use them successfully. 
Caregivers have different learning preferences and use various strategies  (e.g., visual and experiential learners) 
to gain information and experiences as adult learners. Using specific coaching strategies recognizes there are different 
ways to support caregivers as they learn how to embed strategies on their child’s targets. The caregiver’s rate of learning 
will vary. Some caregivers will be anxious to learn to support their child and engage right away. In contrast, others may 
need multiple repetitions. You must meet caregivers where they are and be ready to support them with coaching.
Specific 
Coaching 
StrategiesDemonstration with Narration (Dem/N)  - Demonstration of a strategy 
or a support with explanation of the steps while the caregiver observes. 
The caregiver then tries the strategy with the child during the routine. 
Guided Practice (GP)  - Suggestions for adapting current strategies, 
materials, or exploring new strategies for the targets in routines.
Caregiver Practice (CP)  - The caregiver takes the lead in 
embedding intervention into the routine, while the provider observes.
Problem Solving (PS)  - Discussion on a strategy or target used within 
the routine between the caregiver and provider to revise or improve. Direct Teaching (DT)  - Description of specific intervention 
strategy or how to establish opportunities for using a strategy.
Reflection (Re)  - The provider encourages the caregiver to think 
about and discuss their ideas, concerns, or suggest revisions.
Friedman et al., 2012

--- Page 43 ---
Using and repeating multiple and different coaching strategies within the routine is recommended to increase 
the caregiver’s independence before reflection (Re), problem solving (PS) , and planning. PS and Re on what 
works, what doesn’t, and where else it can be used will close the TLC and support the transition to another 
routine with the same or different targets for the child.  3When the caregiver applies the intervention strategies with the child, it’s called caregiver practice (CP) . CP 
occurs after DT or Dem/N and may include guided practice (GP)  (e.g., suggestions, adaptations of materials 
or positions, different materials). Coaching continues as the provider observes, guides, and explains while the 
caregiver practices embedding the child’s target in the routine. Diverse coaching strategies matched to the 
caregiver’s learning should occur to provide sufficient opportunities for the caregiver to gain confidence.2Helping caregivers prepare for learning intervention strategies or supports 
for targets within routines by sharing information (IS), explaining clearly 
using direct teaching (DT) , and demonstrating what it looks like with an 
emphasis on how to do it by using  demonstration with narration (Dem/N) . 1Research on early intervention substantiates that 
families play with their children and believe that play is 
important for their learning. However, it also identified 
that families do much more throughout their day, such 
as caregiving, chores, community and family errands, 
and learning activities like reading books (Romano et 
al., 2022). The types of activities and the time spent 
on them vary by family based on multiple factors, 
including the child’s age, family organization, culture, 
and opportunity. The shift to caregiver-identified 
routines for embedding encourages adaptations and 
individualization that promote the family’s ownership of 
their child’s plan. FGRBI guides the family to expand 
routines across the categories identified on the grid 
to match their preferences, support the generalization 
of targets, and include other caregivers when possible. Coaching with multiple routines across categories during 
the session encourages families to embed throughout the day to increase opportunities for the child to practice in 
contexts where the targets are used functionally.
The Teaching and Learning Cycle (TLC) offers a framework for systematic 
coaching that promotes individualization for the caregiver and child’s learning. 
Adults and children learn best when the learning occurs in the context in which 
it will be used–the child and family’s everyday routines and activities. Adults 
learn more efficiently when they are clear about what they are learning and why 
it is important. Being systematic in your coaching guides you in your next step 
while coaching to support the caregiver’s learning. KI-6Uses multiple coaching strategies matched to caregiver and child behaviors in 
multiple caregiver-identified routines -  scaffolds and repeats to build competence 
and confidence
37 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualTeaching and Learning CycleRoutine Categories
After initial observation (Ob), the cycle should start at the parent’s comfort level and then reduce support as they gain 
confidence and competence (e.g., beginning with DT and GP for a new strategy or routine or starting with CP or Re 
when they are familiar with the strategies and routines). The goal of coaching is for the caregiver to have sufficient 
opportunities to apply the intervention strategies while the child practices the targets in the routine. As the caregiver 
gains confidence and competence (i.e., mastery of the intervention strategy), coaching focuses on their next TLC 
steps—expanding strategies to new targets or routines throughout the day or identifying new strategies.
1
23
Woods et al., 2011Play Routines Caregiving Routines
Play with Objects/
Constructive PlayPretend Play Transition(s), Care, 
and SafetyDressing Related
Physical Play Social Games Hygiene Related Food Related
Learning Activities Community and Family Errands
Literacy and Books Music, Songs, and 
RhymesFamily Chores Community and 
Family Errands
Technology 
SupportedWriting and 
DrawingSocialization Activities Family Recreation
© 2004 FGRBI, Updated 2024FGRBI Family Routine Categories

--- Page 44 ---
KI-6Uses multiple coaching strategies matched to caregiver and child behaviors in 
multiple caregiver-identified routines -  scaffolds and repeats to build competence 
and confidence
38 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualPutting it all Together
Remember Clarisa from KI-4?  Jenny, Clarisa’s mom, identified multiple 
targets (e.g., naming favorite foods and animals, sitting with balance, 
asking for more, and taking bites from a spoon) embedded into multiple 
routines (e.g., books, snacks/meals, play with toys) for the session. 
Let’s look at how Ava, the provider, could coach her during a session to 
complete KI-6.  
Category 1 - Caregiving Routine 1 - Meals/Snack Coaching Strategies
Clarisa is finishing her breakfast while Jenny identifies the KI-4. Ava observes and shares feedback (KI-5): “You did a great 
job holding the spoon close to her lips and waiting for her to open her mouth and pull the pancake off the fork. She sure 
likes her pancakes!” Feeding continues, with Clarisa taking another bite, and Ava begins coaching by suggesting (GP) 
that Jenny put the fork on the tray between bites to encourage Clarisa to ask for mor e. 
Jenny puts the fork on the tray, and Clarisa looks. Ava uses GP again when she asks Jenny what she thinks Clarisa would 
do if she said, “More bite,” while looking and pointing at the fork. Jenny tries, and Clarisa squeals and kicks her feet. 
Jenny continues saying, “More bite,” encouraging Clarisa to vocalize until she has finished her breakfast (CP). 
Ava and Jenny reflect on what worked (Re) while Jenny wipes Clarisa’s hands and the tray off. 
Category 2 - Play Routines 2 & 3 - Toy Play/Social Games Coaching Strategies 
Jenny sits Clarisa on the floor and offers her a favorite toy. Ava and Jenny discuss the best places for pillows that protect 
her but allow her to work on stabilizing her balance (PS). Ava shares developmental information on early gestures (KI-3), 
describ es how to use imitation and touch cues to encourage Clarisa to reach (DT), and then uses Dem/N  to illustrate 
how to encourage Clarisa to “reach” to request a toy. Jenny shifts to the F2F position with Clarisa and offers a toy, waits, 
shakes the toy to get Clarisa’s attention, and gives her the toy when Clarisa reaches. Ava suggests trying a different toy 
(GP). They practice with a few toys (CP) until Clarisa tips to the side. Jenny catches her and sits her up again. 
Ava asks Jenny what she thinks worked and what didn’t (Re) and if there are any other games or routines that they could 
play while Clarisa worked on sitting (KI-9). Jenny suggests playing Peek-a-Boo, a favorite game, or looking at books while 
sitting on the floor instead of in a chair.
Jenny uses a blanket to play peekaboo with Clarisa while Ava observes. Clarisa kicks her legs, squeals, and grabs the 
blanket while the caregiver says, “Peek.” Ava suggests adding the “more” request to the routine (GP), and Jenny agrees. 
They repeat four turns (CP) before Clarisa loses balance. Ava asks Jenny to reflect on how it went (Re), and she responds 
that it’s something  she can do easily in the bedroom or family room as well as during playtime.
Category 3 - Learning Routine 4 - Book Reading Coaching Strategies 
Jenny and Ava review the targets for book reading (KI-4) and then discuss how to set it up since it is a new routine (PS). 
They decide to  try having Jenny hold an animal picture book on Clarisa’s lap while sitting F2F on the floor to give her 
more practice sitting. Ava tells Jenny to say “dog,” point to the picture, and repeat (DT). Jenny tries it, takes Clarisa’s 
finger, and points to the same picture while repeating “dog” (CP). After observing, Ava asks Jenny what she thought 
(Re). Jenny responds that it was uncomfortable, and she worried about Clarisa tipping over when she had her hands 
full with the book and pointing. They continue discussing options (PS) and decide to move back to the rocking chair for 
books and continue the routine with labeling and pointing to pictures (CP) as targets while rocking. Jenny shares that she 
might try book  reading on the floor again when Clarisa is more stable and is sitting independently.Case Study
How can I match my coaching to the family’s identified everyday routines and learning preferences?Reflection

--- Page 45 ---
Provides general and specific strengths-based feedback 
on caregiver and child behaviors and interactions -  
encourages caregiver and child engagement Observation and Opportunities to Embed
7
General and specific feedback are integral to coaching. 
Feedback helps to establish and maintain the relationship 
between the caregiver and provider and promotes 
the caregiver’s understanding and application of the 
embedded intervention process. General feedback 
reinforces the caregiver and the child’s interaction. It’s 
used for motivation and for moments of celebration. 
Specific feedback focuses on developing caregiver 
knowledge and application of the strategies, increasing 
the frequency of embedded learning, and reflecting on 
the child’s participation with the caregiver. When using 
specific feedback, you describe what the caregiver did 
to support the child’s participation and learning. It can 
delineate the accuracy or frequency of the child’s targets 
or offer suggestions to refine the strategy and target.
Adult learners value functional and relevant input for supporting their child. Feedback should be honest and 
intentional if it is going to build capacity and support the caregiver and child’s outcome development. Honest 
does not mean critical. Feedback is strengths-based when it identifies what is working, provides positive 
descriptions of how the caregiver uses strategies with the child, and leads to collaboration between you and the 
caregiver that builds on their strengths. The most effective feedback occurs during or immediately following the 
caregiver and child’s actions in the routine and is offered with the recognition that the caregiver has valuable 
knowledge and experiences that contribute to their learning. Caregivers are more likely to use feedback to help 
their child learn in the activities that are important to them and fit within their schedule.
Examples of Key 
Indicator 7. 
Specific Feedback
• “He ate five bites in a row! 
That’s a record. You offered 
just enough food at the right 
time. Yay to you both!”
• “You waited for Jaelyn to lift 
her foot before you said ‘shoe.’ 
Your label prompted her to 
raise her foot for her shoe.”
• “José likes it when you roll 
the ball back and forth. See 
his smile and the way he leans 
forward into the action? He’s 
responding and letting you 
know he wants another turn.”
• “Do you realize you are both 
smiling right now? You helped 
her enjoy the music when you 
smiled and danced with her!”
39 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualLooks Like
Describing specific examples of the target, activity, materials, strategies, 
or the outcome of the behavior (e.g., “DeShawn got what he asked for 
when he pointed to his toothbrush.” “Making a chair out of pillows on the 
floor is ingenious. Juliana can sit up and reach her toys.”).
Sharing information to focus the caregiver’s attention on the child’s 
behaviors (e.g., “Did you see how excited he was when you put a block 
on the tower and how he added more blocks? Mason showed you how 
much fun he was having when he joined you stacking the blocks.”).
Encouraging interactions that promote a positive relationship (e.g., “It 
looks like you both are having fun.”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Offering general feedback without intentionally connecting to the child’s 
target, caregiver’s strategy use, or engagement and participation (e.g., 
“Nice job.”).
Offering only feedback about the child’s behaviors and not pointing out how 
the caregiver’s support relates to the child’s response (e.g., “Good talking.”).
Offering more suggestions or corrective feedback for the situation than 
the caregiver can implement efficiently.

--- Page 46 ---
Considerations for Key Indicator 7. 
Providers often feel more comfortable giving feedback  on 
what the child did in the routine than on the caregiver’s actions. 
However, your primary role as the provider is to provide 
strengths-based feedback to the caregiver that supports their 
knowledge and connects the child and caregiver’s interactions 
to build their confidence. When specific feedback is focused 
on the caregiver, it affirms what they are doing by describing 
their actions and promoting their participation by encouraging 
them to continue. 
It’s important for specific feedback to be individualized  to the 
caregiver’s strengths and preferences, the priorities and interests 
of their family, and the stage in your relationship. Initial feedback 
may be information-based, explaining what the caregiver is 
doing and how it supports the child. Feedback will likely change 
over time as the caregiver gains confidence and may include more reflection and problem solving opportunities. 
Feedback demonstrates to caregivers that you are listening and learning from them by responding to their comments, 
supporting their participation, and including their ideas in the session.
General feedback to the parent and child can be combined with specific feedback  to keep the momentum 
going, especially during a new or more challenging activity. For example, offering a positive comment or general 
encouragement to the caregiver and child to continue an interaction (e.g., “That was great!” “Way to go!” “Look at 
you guys getting the job done!”) followed by specific descriptive or instructional feedback to clarify or expand the 
interaction at the end of the activity (e.g., “You read his cue that he was getting tired of picking up blocks, told him 
you wanted just two more, counted so he knew how many were left, and then clapped when he was done. Those 
strategies were just what he needed!”).
Feedback in the routine not only reviews key points from observation  and verifies the caregiver’s perceptions 
but also helps the caregiver to make the connections between how the strategy supported the child’s learning and 
how they applied it. For this reason, specific feedback directed to the caregiver increases their ability to embed 
intervention more than feedback regarding the child only.
Specific feedback can be descriptive or instructive.  Descriptive feedback puts words to the caregiver’s actions as 
they engage with their child and explains why their support was helpful for the child’s learning. In contrast, instructive 
feedback adds new information for the “next steps” in using the intervention strategy or for increasing the frequency 
of opportunities using the strategy. You may use instructive feedback after descriptive feedback to expand the 
caregiver and child’s participation, embedding the targets into the routine. 
Strengths-based feedback can and should occur throughout the visit.  While in a routine, specific strengths-based 
feedback is most likely to occur following caregiver practice. After feedback, coaching can continue in the routine or 
transition to planning, problem solving, or practice in a new routine. 
KI-7Provides general and specific strengths-based feedback on caregiver and child 
behaviors and interactions - encourages caregiver and child engagement 
40 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualObservation  
& OpportunitiesYes Partial Not Observed
KI-7. Provides general and 
specific strengths-based 
feedback on caregiver 
and child behaviors and 
interactions - encourages 
caregiver and child 
engagementScore Yes if at least 6 
examples of strengths-
based feedback related to 
the child or family targets, 
routines, or strategies are 
provided AND  at least 4 of 
those examples are specific 
feedback to the caregiver.Score Partial if fewer than 
6 examples of strengths-
based feedback related to 
the child or family targets, 
routines, or strategies are 
provided OR fewer than 
4 examples are specific 
feedback to the caregiver.Score N/O if general or 
specific feedback related to 
the child or family targets, 
routines, or strategies is not 
given.

--- Page 47 ---
Using FeedbackKI-7Provides general and specific strengths-based feedback on caregiver and child 
behaviors and interactions - encourages caregiver and child engagement 
41 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualWhile learning about a caregiver’s use of intervention strategies, try sharing strengths-based 
feedback on the responsive instructional strategies described in KI-8. These evidence-based 
strategies are easy to use and can be incorporated into many routines and interactions.
Getting to Yes in KI-7
What providers say about shifting from child-based feedback to caregiver capacity-building feedback.Provider Quotes
It was hard to shift to caregiver feedback 
after years of focusing only on the child, 
but it makes perfect sense. Now, I try to put 
caregiver feedback first, then weave in the 
child’s actions. That way, the feedback includes 
both the child—which I am good at—and the 
caregiver—which I am learning!  I was shocked to watch my home visit video 
and see that I didn’t use as much feedback as I 
thought I did! I clapped and cheered a lot, but 
other than praise, I used very little feedback, 
especially not specific feedback. There were 
so many missed opportunities to reinforce the 
caregiver’s learning.  What’s the difference between praise and strengths-based feedback?
Praise is an expression of approval, an affirmation, 
or a celebration of an effort or accomplishment that 
encourages and motivates. There are many “awesome” 
child and caregiver experiences worthy of clapping 
and cheering. However, celebration should not be 
confused with feedback that builds the caregiver’s 
capacity for embedding intervention to support their 
child’s learning. They need more information!Praise
Strengths-based feedback to the caregiver shares 
specific information focused on continuing or 
enhancing their ability to embed intervention in 
the moment. In addition to encouragement and 
motivation, strengths-based feedback also describes 
and teaches. This type of feedback acknowledges 
the caregiver’s experiences and offers helpful 
descriptions and suggestions.Feedback
Formulate a strengths-based comment on 
the interactions between the caregiver and 
child that are related to the target, routine, 
or the caregiver’s intervention strategy use.
Share your comment connecting the 
caregiver’s strategy use to the child’s 
target or participation in the routine.
After specific descriptive feedback, you may:
a. Continue with instructive feedback or 
ask a reflective follow-up question to 
engage the caregiver in discussion or 
problem solving,
b. Shift to coaching on these targets and 
strategies in the routine, or  
c. Respond to the caregiver’s comments 
and their reflection about what to do 
next.Remember, it’s not just what you do and say,  
but how you do or say it that promotes caregiver confidence and competence.

--- Page 48 ---
Putting it all TogetherKI-7Provides general and specific strengths-based feedback on caregiver and child 
behaviors and interactions - encourages caregiver and child participation
Case Study - Part 1
Chris observes Ford putting on his pants for 20 seconds and then provides intentional strengths-based descriptive 
feedback to Leah. (Component of KI-5)
• Provider:  “Did you notice that he said sock each time you modeled the word? That’s terrific! You said sock, and 
he imitated you each time. He took his turn in your conversation!”
Meet Ford! He’s two and a half and a very busy boy! Ford’s IFSP outcome is to use 
two-word combinations while getting dressed, helping with chores, and reading 
books. He has over 50 single words and is just starting to put them together. 
Leah, Ford’s mom, told Chris, the EI, she would like to work on imitating one to 
two words during dressing as the target in KI-4. The script below is an illustration 
of how feedback (KI-7) is used in combination with KIs 5 and 6. 
The dressing routine continues, and Chris transitions to coaching.
• Provider:  “What about adding a simple descriptive word like… big shirt, red shirt, or Bluey shirt to model 
2-word combinations instead of single words as you dress him? Descriptive words, like colors and sizes, 
expand his vocabulary with words he can use in many activities as well as in dressing. Do you want to try?”  
(KI-6 Guided Practice)
Leah chooses a shirt with Bluey’s picture and labels it “shirt” while showing it to Ford. She repeats “shirt” and puts 
it on him as he stretches out his arms to help. She straightens it out and says, “Bluey shirt.” He doesn’t imitate. 
(KI-6 Caregiver Practice) 
• Provider:  “Good try.” (KI-7 General Feedback)
• Provider:  “Try touching the picture on his shirt and say, ‘Bluey shirt.’ Wait for a second and repeat it if he doesn’t 
say anything.” (KI-6 Direct Teaching)
Leah points at Ford’s shirt and says, “Bluey shirt.” Ford pulls up his shirt and shows Bluey’s picture to her. She 
labels it for him again and pauses to encourage him to take another turn. He says, “Bluey,” and Leah repeats, 
“Bluey’s shirt,” and gives him a high five. (KI-6 Caregiver Practice)
• Provider:  “That’s it! Ford is watching, listening, and imitating your words. The practice with familiar and favorite 
objects will make it easier for you and more fun for him.” (KI-7 General followed by Specific Feedback) KI-7Provides general and specific strengths-based feedback on caregiver and child 
behaviors and interactions - encourages caregiver and child engagement 
42 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators Manual
In Ford’s dressing routine, Chris observed, provided specific feedback, and then began the 
coaching cycle. The routine continued, and Chris offered Leah another suggestion (guided 
practice), which she tried. Leah putting on Ford’s shirt (using the suggested strategy while 
Chris observed) would be identified as caregiver practice. General and specific feedback were 
used in the Teaching and Learning Cycle.
How do I intentionally focus specific strengths-based feedback to the caregiver (rather than the child) 
that connects the child’s learning to the caregiver’s actions? 
When is general feedback most appropriate, and specific feedback most supportive? How do I make 
sure the match is there for each family?Reflection

--- Page 49 ---
Problem solving in KI-8 refers to an exchange of ideas between you 
and the caregiver to build their capacity to identify, use, and modify 
instructional strategies that support the child’s targets. Problem solving 
is not always about a problem or something that isn’t working. It can 
be an exchange of ideas or brainstorming about new instructional 
strategies, different routines to embed the targets, or how other family 
members can participate. 
Research shows that caregivers use a variety of evidence-based 
instructional strategies that are effective for child learning. The 
question isn’t whether implemented interventions work; it’s which 
strategies work for which targets in which routines for each family! 
Some strategies are easy to learn and use, while others may need more coaching and practice by the caregiver 
to gain skills using them. Strategies can be multi-purpose and support many different types of learning in various 
routines or may be specific to a skill or developmental delay. Some strategies may be a fit for one routine but not for 
others. KI-8, engaging in problem solving to identify which instructional strategies and how and when to use them, 
is an essential coaching practice for the child, caregiver, and you.
Problem solving expands the caregivers’ capacity by building on their knowledge and experiences with their child. 
Providers listen and learn from the family while offering other perspectives or strategies to incorporate into the best 
plan. As caregivers gain confidence in embedding intervention and supporting their child’s learning, they will use 
critical thinking skills learned from problem solving exchanges to apply instructional strategies in other routines or 
revise them for the child’s current learning targets when appropriate.
Looks Like
Posing open-ended questions or offering prompts that facilitate the 
parent’s contribution (e.g., “I noticed Zahra didn’t pick her snack. Have 
you offered her choices? What have you tried that might encourage 
her participation?”). 
Demonstrating alternatives while describing the thought process or 
scaffolding suggestions for the caregiver to consider (e.g., “I wonder 
if the choices aren’t motivating to her. What do you think?” “What are 
activities that interest her, like reading books or playing the piano?”).
Building consensus on the most useful strategies for all involved in 
the plan (e.g., “You know what works for you. Describe what you want 
it to look like, and then we can figure out how to tweak the strategies 
to make it work for him and your family.”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Listing formal recommendations from books or experts without 
integrating the family’s priorities and beliefs (e.g., “This is a list of 
intervention strategies from the CDC to help early talkers.”).
Identifying the activities, routines, and strategies that will be used without 
including the caregiver’s ideas or addressing their concerns (e.g., “You 
can use touch prompts as cues during meals, dressing, and play.”).
Directing the agenda or providing only the options the provider is 
most comfortable using (e.g., “I have found that it is best to start with 
using choices to require children to make requests.”).Examples of Key Indicator 8. 
• “What do you think would happen 
if you sat face-to-face rather than 
holding him during storytime?”
• “Let’s make a list of strategies you 
like and see if we can use them for 
other targets or routines.”
• “Do you feel like waiting for him 
to take a step will work, or would 
another strategy feel more natural 
to help him get started walking 
rather than being carried?
• “You mentioned that the 
strategies you tried didn’t work. 
Tell me a little more about what 
you saw or tried. Let’s see if we 
can figure it out.”
• “He is responding with a point to 
the picture when you point and 
name it for him. What’s next? Are 
you ready for a new strategy to 
help him take the lead?”
43 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualProblem solves with the caregiver about evidence-based 
instructional strategies to embed - discusses and decides 
which interventions are best for the child and familyProblem Solving and Planning
8


--- Page 50 ---
44 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-8Problem solves with the caregiver about evidence-based instructional strategies 
to embed - discusses and decides which interventions are best for the child and family
Problem Solving  
& PlanningYes Partial Not Observed
KI-8. Problem solves 
with the caregiver 
about evidence-based 
instructional strategies 
to embed - discusses and 
decides which interventions 
are best for the child and 
familyScore Yes if there are at 
least 2 distinct problem 
solving exchanges of 4 turns 
(2 caregiver-2 provider) 
related to instructional 
strategies relevant to the 
session that result in new or 
different ideas, strategies, 
materials, or adaptations 
being identified and agreed 
upon to use.Score Partial if only 1 
example of problem solving 
with 4 turns related to 
instructional strategies 
occurs OR if 2 examples 
of problem solving with 
2-3 turns/exchanges on 
strategies to use occur 
OR if exchanges do not 
result in a new or different 
idea, strategy, materials, or 
adaptations to use.Score N/O if the provider 
does not ask questions 
or make comments to 
engage the caregiver in 
brainstorming or problems 
solving about instructional 
strategies for targets or 
routines during the session.Considerations for Key Indicator 8. 
Problem solving has been identified as a preferred coaching strategy  by caregivers because of its collaborative 
nature. While the process of problem solving (e.g., learning about what is and isn’t working, identifying ideas, 
evaluating options, and choosing strategies) is natural for many adults, others may be reluctant to participate initially 
or may defer to you for answers. Caregivers share that they value opportunities to exchange information with you to 
get new ideas or revise strategies they have previously tried (Salisbury et al., 2018; IA-DMM, 2019). 
Coaching caregivers on evidence-based (EB) interventions  that are appropriate for the child, acceptable to the 
caregiver, and provide the level of support necessary is core to the success of the child’s learning. Not all instructional 
strategies are a good match for parents, nor do they work in every routine for every target. It is important for 
caregivers to use a variety of strategies that meet the child’s needs and the family’s preferences so they can have 
options for different targets and contexts over time. Problem solving can identify which strategies to use and how to 
adapt them for the child and caregiver. 
Multiple exchanges of information and ideas on instructional strategies in the problem solving discussion are 
important for both you and the caregiver. There are many options for instructional strategies that can be tried, not just 
one. Ensuring the caregiver has at least two opportunities in each exchange to share their opinions and ideas and to 
reflect on their experiences facilitates a resolution or decision that is both informed and individualized for them. It may 
be difficult for providers who want to “solve” the problem to listen and encourage the caregiver to lead the exchange; 
however, when the caregiver makes the decision based on their beliefs, they can more readily implement it.  
Problem solving or brainstorming is a learned skill  that continues to develop into early adulthood. Because of the 
cognitive load, it may be more difficult to continue to expand these skills during times of stress, illness, depression, 
or distraction. Problem solving builds on previous experiences and available information and reflects the person’s 
values and priorities. Frequently engaging in problem solving with caregivers about instructional strategies offers 
opportunities to learn more about how to support them through coaching. Information, multiple opportunities, and 
repetition are all helpful when building the caregiver’s confidence in problem solving.
Providing frequent opportunities and scaffolding supports the caregiver’s participation in the process.  Starting 
small by discussing a familiar intervention strategy or referring to one already working can increase the caregiver’s 
comfort in brainstorming and problem solving. Listening and encouraging them to determine what they have tried 
before or what works best for them motivates and encourages additional exchanges that clarify how to use the 
strategy effectively within the routine. Expanding on an idea or strategy that works allows them to build from the 
point of strength and familiarity with a decision they can use.
Assessing the need for assistive technology (AT) may be important to support child learning.  Brainstorming what 
strategy to use and when gives the family options to choose from and opportunities to embed in various routines. 
Encourage the family to use different strategies, materials, or devices in a variety of routines to see what fits into 
their day. Using demonstration with narration and caregiver practice as coaching strategies during the brainstorming 
phase for AT is often necessary.

--- Page 51 ---
1
2KI-8Problem solves with the caregiver about evidence-based instructional strategies 
to embed - discusses and decides which interventions are best for the child and family
45 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualEvidence-based Instructional Strategies
Problem solving instructional strategies that are a good match 
for the child and caregiver is informed by considering the child’s 
learning trajectory (Schwartz & Woods, 2015). For example, there 
are differences between strategies for the acquisition of a target and 
those appropriate for maintenance. A caregiver may be competent 
in using strategies to support their child using a target fluently in 
different routines, but needs to learn additional strategies that 
offer more specific support for a new or complex target. Thinking 
about the phases of learning for caregivers can also be helpful 
when selecting specific coaching strategies to help caregivers gain 
confidence and competence using instructional strategies.
4
3Functional/Familiar
Universal
Specific
ExtendedMaintenance
GeneralizationAcquisition
FluencyPhases of Learning
Resource
Definitions and descriptions 
of the various strategies are 
available on the FGRBI website.
Steps to Systematic Use of Instructional Strategies
Many instructional strategies with an evidence base have been used effectively in parent-implemented interventions 
and caregiver coaching with infants and toddlers. The strategies listed in the graphic below are helpful tools when 
considering how to support the caregiver and child’s learning. Building on the family’s strengths with familiar and 
functional strategies and supports they are already using is an essential first step. Responsive or universal intervention 
strategies are integral throughout the intervention process and build a foundation for positive caregiver/child 
interaction. Specific support strategies are valuable when caregivers teach the child new or complex behaviors. 
Extended support strategies offer the most structure and support or address the child’s specific learning needs. Most, 
if not all, of the strategies are familiar and intended to be used with caregivers to ensure options that match the child 
and family are available. The intent is to use the lowest level of support for the child and caregiver to be successful 
and reduce support as targets are learned, increasing the child’s functional and independent use.
Responsive Strategies
Engage with me!
• Face-to-face positioning
• Join focus of child’s attention
• Follow child’s lead
• Read child’s cues
• Name simple objects
Play with me!
• Gain and maintain child’s attention
• Use interesting actions & words
• Take turns
• Repeat actions and words
Talk with me!
• Talk about what’s happening
• Use child’s language
• Label new words
• Encourage responses & respondSpecific Support Strategies
Expect engagement
• Waiting
• Choices
• Environmental arrangement
• Balanced turns
• Playful interruptions
Expand learning
• Ask open-ended questions
• Suggest extensions of activity
• Expansions
• Recasts
Elicit responses
• Contingent imitation
• Pause before next step
• Antecedent strategies
Encourage participation
• Provide reinforcement
 oNaturally occurring
 oImmediate
 oContingentExtended Support Strategies
• Prompts
 oVisual
 oVerbal
 oGestural
 oPhysical
• Prompt sequence & fading 
procedures
 oLeast to most participation 
prompts
 oMost to least prompts
 oMilieu teaching prompt 
sequence
 oGraduated guidance
• Accommodations & adaptations
 oAssistive technology
 oOrthotics
 oMaterial arrangement
• AAC
 oSpeech-generating device
 oPicture communication cards
• Visual schedules
 oFirst-then boards
 oRoutine schedules
 oDaily activitiesFamily Strategies
• Family-identified strategies to 
support child participation
• Everyday materials and 
routines
• Family activities and routines 
that work for them
© 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025

--- Page 52 ---
KI-8Problem solves with the caregiver about evidence-based instructional strategies 
to embed - discusses and decides which interventions are best for the child and family
46 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualPutting it all Together
Do you remember Ford from KI-7? Here’s an example of a reflection and 
problem solving exchange after his dressing routine. Notice how the 
caregiver (Leah) and provider (Chris) have multiple turns and a resolution.
• Provider:  “How do you think dressing went today?” (KI-10)  Provider Exchange 1
• Caregiver:  “Good. He liked his shirt. I couldn’t think of words for him to say, so it took a while.” Caregiver 
Exchange 1
• Provider:  “I think it worked! He imitated you with three two-word combinations; that’s good for such a brief 
routine. You kept his attention, used simple words, and took turns. All great strategies. Any thoughts on what 
would work better or could be quicker?” Provider Exchange 2
• Caregiver:  “I don’t know. Naming the picture on his shirt worked. Maybe I can think about what words I will use 
when I pick his clothes out. I’m just not that good at thinking of words on the spot.” Caregiver Exchange 2
• Provider:  “That’s a great idea. You can decide which words to say as you choose his clothes so you will be ready. 
Like when you grab his shirt, you look at the picture and choose a word… I see lots of fun shirts in his drawer, like 
this Nemo shirt or this bug shirt. How’s that sound?” Provider Exchange 3 (Optional)
• Caregiver:  “Yeah. That makes sense. I’m always in a hurry when I’m getting him dressed, so I don’t think to talk. 
I could also use colors. I’m sure I can remember that.” Caregiver Exchange 3 (Resolution)
• Provider:  “I think this will get easier. This was your first try. And you don’t have to use two-word combinations 
for every item of clothing, especially when you are in a hurry. Start small, practice, and just keep trying.” (KI-8)
Summary and Review• Direct teaching
• Demonstration with 
narration
• Guided practice
• Caregiver practice
• General & specific 
feedback
• Problem solving
• Reflection• Family strategies
• Responsive strategies
• Specific support strategies
• Extended support strategies
Examples:
• Gestures to request
• Feeds self with fingers
• Names objects
• Walks with support
• Takes turnsCoaching  
Strategies
(KI-6)
ProviderTargets
ChildCaregiver
Instructional
StrategiesEveryone has their role in coaching! Providers use caregiver coaching strategies to support the caregiver to embed 
instructional strategies to teach the child’s targets in everyday routines and activities. It’s all connected! 
Case Study - Part 2
How do I remind myself to not get stuck with the instructional strategies that work for me and not offer 
options to caregivers that might be better for them? How do I reflect on the cultural match for families? 
How do I ensure I provide enough information about various instructional strategies so the caregiver has 
options to choose from that are comfortable and reflect their culture and preferences?Reflection

--- Page 53 ---
Family members know what they do during their day and what they 
want their child to learn. However, they may need information and 
coaching to identify the routines, or the When/Where  to embed 
strategies to support their child’s learning. Starting small, building 
on success, and using the family’s routines establishes their role in 
decision-making about embedding in their daily activities.
While increasing the frequency of practice for the child is enhanced 
through the use of multiple family routines and activities, it is not 
the only reason for embedding in them. Learning in the context 
where the skills are functional and meaningful enhances the child’s 
participation in the family as a contributing member, as well as 
increases their independence with important skills.
Caregivers may not realize how many opportunities there are for their child 
to learn naturally in their everyday activities or know that practice, when 
the target is useful and meaningful, can accelerate the child’s learning. 
Offering concrete examples of embedding in routines that are relevant to 
the caregiver helps them understand why routines are valuable learning 
opportunities and how to identify which ones will work best for them.
47 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualProblem Solving and Planning
Supports the caregiver to identify new or expand current 
opportunities multiple times across routine categories and 
describes strategies to embed - plans to increase opportunities 
and generalize use in everyday contextsProblem Solving and Planning
9
Examples of Key Indicator 9. 
• “Let’s look at some caregiving 
routines in addition to play and 
see what else you are doing 
where targets and strategies can 
be added.”  
• “What does morning look like? 
Are there other routines, other 
than breakfast, where you can 
practice his targets?” 
• “Tarek is following your directions 
to get his diaper and wipes 
when you ask. What other simple 
chores could be a ‘job’ for him?” 
• “She took your hand to get to 
the highchair. Where else could 
Reese practice her walking? How 
would that fit into your day?”
• “Bath time works well for Diego 
and big brother Antonio because 
it’s fun and full of opportunities to 
practice his words and play with 
toys. What other times in the day 
could they play together? How 
would you set that up?”Looks Like
Brainstorming when and where to expand opportunities to embed 
strategies into other routines (e.g., “Chen responded to the small 
portions at snack by requesting more. What other routines could you 
use small portions to encourage him to request?”).
Helping families use the natural learning opportunities and routines 
they already participate in for intervention without adding more (e.g., 
“Let’s walk around the kitchen and family room and look for places 
Fayth could safely sit and play while you are there doing chores.”).
Using problem solving and planning to include the caregiver’s ideas in 
their interactions (e.g., “You said that Sophia looks for the cat, Oscar, 
when she is playing on the floor. What else could she do with Oscar?”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Bringing a toy bag or using the child’s toys primarily for play interventions 
without expanding to other types of routines and activities the family 
identifies that occur throughout the day.
Providing activities for the family to use rather than engaging them in 
the identification and planning of those that are most natural and will 
occur with sufficient repetition for learning to occur. 
Giving the family a list of materials and planned activities the caregiver 
and child should use at specified times. “The intervention (the information 
and practices that make it up) must fit 
into the existing beliefs and practices 
already in place.”
Bernheimer & Weisner, 2007

--- Page 54 ---
Considerations for Key Indicator 9. 
Supporting caregivers in identifying routines  that are a good match for embedding intervention is an ongoing 
process. You may need to begin with examples of what the family already does that would be a routine. Others 
may need your support in “building” a meaningful and predictable sequence so that targets and strategies can be 
intentionally embedded. As caregivers gain experience, help them expand opportunities into more and different 
types of routines. Exploration, discussion, and practice of potential routines should occur multiple times throughout 
the session. 
Coaching caregivers in routines  is facilitated by the features that 
make a routine a “routine.” When caregivers understand these 
features, they begin to identify when and how to embed strategies 
for targets. For example, features such as a clear beginning and 
ending and a logical and predictable sequence increase familiarity 
and organize the caregiver and child’s participation. These features 
can also enhance your coaching. A clear beginning signals you to 
observe for opportunities to coach within the routine, while a specified 
ending supports the child’s transition and provides opportunities for 
reflection with the caregiver. A logical sequence and predictable turns 
focus the coaching on the caregiver’s strategy use and opportunities 
to provide specific feedback. Repetition in the routine increases 
caregiver practice and coaching opportunities using multiple different 
strategies matched to the caregiver’s needs.
48 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-9Supports the caregiver to identify new or expand current opportunities 
multiple times across routine categories and describes strategies to embed - 
plans to increase opportunities and generalize use in everyday contexts
Problem Solving  
& PlanningYes Partial Not Observed
KI-9. Supports the 
caregiver to identify 
new or expand current 
opportunities multiple 
times across routine 
categories and describes 
strategies to embed - plans 
to increase opportunities 
and generalize use in 
everyday contextsScore Yes if the provider 
supports caregiver to 
identify new or expand 
current routines 3 or more 
times across at least 2 
routine categories during 
the session AND  discusses 
a plan to embed the target 
for each routine.Score Partial if the provider 
asks about additional or 
different routines across 
categories fewer than 3 
times during the session OR 
if the caregiver and provider 
identify but do not describe 
a plan to embed the target 
for each routine.Score N/O if questions or 
comments between the 
provider and caregiver about 
expanding routines and 
describing how to embed do 
not occur OR if the provider 
directs the caregiver or 
offers a list of other routines, 
times, and plan to embed.
Beginning & 
Ending
Flexible  
FrameworkFunctional  
OutcomesRepetition
Logical &  
PredictableMeaningful &  
IndividualizedFeatures of a Routine
Embedding intervention strategies and supports into the sequence  and organization of the family’s routine 
makes integrating and applying them easier for the caregiver. Join in the family’s routines, but don’t take over. 
Collaborating with caregivers on which targets and strategies are the best fit helps maintain the routine’s structure 
while including practice opportunities for the child. Remember, there is no universal organization for any routine; 
it is just what works best for the caregiver and child.
Repetition and flexibility increase learning opportunities.  Opportunities for repetition are inherent in many 
routines (e.g., putting toys, dishes, and laundry away). Distributing practice throughout the day in different types 
of routines (e.g., caregiving, play, chores, stories, and errands) identified by caregivers provides repetition and 
facilitates generalization (Kashinath et al., 2006). It also provides a backup when planned activities, such as outdoor 
play or book reading, get squeezed out of a caregiver’s busy day. Including targets in multiple routines is an 
insurance policy that will allow practice opportunities to occur regularly.

--- Page 55 ---
Using different types of family-identified routines across various descriptive categories facilitates the child’s 
learning in multiple functional and motivating contexts that reflect how the family gets things done. Additional 
family members can participate when routines occur throughout the day, increasing opportunities for practice and 
promoting generalization. Including different types of routines encourages practice in the context where the targets 
are meaningful, immediately applicable, and promote the child’s participation.
49 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-9Supports the caregiver to identify new or expand current opportunities 
multiple times across routine categories and describes strategies to embed - 
plans to increase opportunities and generalize use in everyday contexts
Supporting Caregivers to Expand Everyday Routines
Identifying Routines for Family Fun
Identify routines that build on 
memories and familiarity to 
engage caregivers. What were the 
caregiver’s favorite games or play 
activities as a child? Did they enjoy 
tea parties, building with blocks, 
playing in the sand, or coloring? 
What do they like to do now? How 
can the child participate? 
How does the family relax? How 
can the child’s targets be included? 
For example, family pizza night 
may occur only once a week, but 
if it’s Friday, there’s pizza! Can the 
child “help” set the table (or floor), 
pass out napkins and cups, clean 
up afterward, or take out the trash? 
Movement, language, and social 
connectedness can be value-added 
to the child’s specific learning 
targets. Does the family have a 
favorite type of music they listen 
to, sing, or dance to (e.g., Beyoncé 
is ageless!)? If they travel, what’s 
playing? Can the child join in 
making it a family activity rather 
than device-driven?
When extended family gets 
together, are there traditions, 
favorite activities, or events 
the child could participate in? 
Decorating paper lanterns or 
cookies does not have to occur 
only once a year!
What happens infrequently but can 
be very motivating? Johnny took 
little cars to the races with his dad; 
Gianna and her family loved hikes 
and picnics; JP went to his sister’s 
T-ball games and cruised on the 
bleachers, requesting snacks!
What needs to occur for the child 
to participate in family activities 
safely? Is the child’s participation 
limited due to safety concerns? 
What adaptations or new targets 
would enhance the child’s 
participation?There is more to life than caregiving and chores! Brainstorm options with each family and wait to be surprised at the 
variations they include to expand opportunities and generalization of targets. Targets we are  
working onEmbedding in Everyday Routines
© 2005 FGRBI, Updated 2024Resource
Sometimes, caregivers benefit 
from a visual to help them 
connect the dots between 
targets, routines, and 
strategies. Pictures or fillable 
forms can help caregivers 
identify options. The caregiver 
identifies what matches their 
priorities and life. Not every 
box needs to be filled in; more 
isn’t necessarily better. 
Hygiene/Dressing Playtime
Books/Social Games/SongsSnacks/Meals Community
Chores
OtherPhysical Play

--- Page 56 ---
50 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-9Supports the caregiver to identify new or expand current opportunities 
multiple times across routine categories and describes strategies to embed - 
plans to increase opportunities and generalize use in everyday contexts
Getting to Yes in KI-9
Did you know? 
It often takes more than one comment or question to start the conversation. Caregivers may answer your open-
ended questions, “Where else could you practice?” or “What are other routines where you could use this strategy?” 
with an equally open-ended response such as “Oh, anytime or anywhere!” If your general question results in a 
general response, try using follow-up questions to scaffold and provide a context for the caregiver’s response. 
Once a routine or activity is identified, don’t forget to practice or discuss how it can work. Reflection and problem 
solving options for practice will increase the caregiver’s confidence. 
What did I do in this session that helped the caregiver identify and decide which routines to use for 
initial practice and those for expansion and generalization? 
What strategies did I use that balanced the importance of sufficient practice for the child to learn with the 
importance of the caregiver’s capacity for embedding intervention in routines that work for them, too?Reflection
KI-9 is more than just listing possible routines for practicing the child’s targets. You support the caregiver 
in identifying new or different routines 3 or more times across categories AND  practice or describe how 
the targets and strategies will be embedded.
Encouraging the caregivers to think about and discuss other options for embedding during the 
session emphasizes that the routines practiced in the session are not the only contexts for learning. 
Embedding can and should occur throughout the day in activities that are meaningful to the caregiver 
and reflect their way of life.  
Remember, identifying new routines is not a laundry list of what the caregiver “could do.” It is the 
identification and description of routines the family “does do” where embedding targets for the child 
could be included as a part of their everyday life. Life is more than play or caregiving. Brainstorm options 
across categories that fit the family.
Questions and comments are used to identify new routines that occur throughout the session, such as 
during updates, session planning, after observation and caregiver practice, or when problem solving. The 
discussion helps the caregiver visualize the routine with the targets and strategies. A verbal description 
may be sufficient if the targets and strategies are familiar. Practice, if necessary, illustrates the strategies.
Expanding routines is more than completing the same routine with another caregiver or in another 
location. To be included in KI-9, the caregiver-identified routine needs to add opportunities for practice 
beyond those routines coached in the session. Additional routines should expand categories (e.g., during 
chores or transitions) and use different materials, locations, or people to support generalization.

--- Page 57 ---
Reflection encourages review and evaluation of previous 
experiences, knowledge, and priorities, as well as 
considerations for future action, making it an important adult 
learning and capacity-building coaching practice (Lorio et 
al., 2020). Engaging in reflection encourages parents to 
“self-assess” their contributions to their child’s learning by 
thinking about and discussing how their actions impact their 
child’s learning.  The reciprocal exchanges of information 
between you and the caregiver during reflection promotes 
both their engagement in their child’s intervention and your 
understanding of the family’s priorities and experiences. 
Listening to and learning from the caregiver’s reflections 
facilitates the integration of family beliefs, experiences, and 
expectations and encourages you to align your coaching 
practices to meet the diverse needs of each family. 
Reflection is a multipurpose coaching strategy that supports 
caregivers as they gain confidence and competence in 
embedding intervention with their child. It encourages 
the caregiver to think and talk about their Family 5Qs—
the What , When/Where , Why, and How to embed 
intervention. Purposeful and plentiful reflection during the 
session encourages the caregiver to participate with you 
during updates, discussing why new targets or routines are 
important, which intervention strategies are working, and 
what comes next. Review is an important type of reflection 
that encourages caregivers to think about and integrate 
their new and former learning to ensure a plan that works for 
them is developed. Reflection often leads to brainstorming 
or problem solving discussions that expand the family’s 
leadership and decision-making. This underscores the 
importance of using the family’s preferred language so that 
they can reflect meaningfully and confidently.
51 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualAsks questions and makes comments that promote 
caregiver reflection and review - identifies what works for 
the caregiver and child Reflection and Review
10
Examples of Key Indicator 10.
• “What do you think you did that helped Kayla 
during mealtime?”
• “How will you explain to Grandma that Rosa 
can make requests using her sounds and 
gestures?”
• “How do you feel it went using wait time 
went during the cleanup and handwashing 
routines? Any hassles for you?”
• “Of all the things we tried today, what feels 
like it fits best for you and your family. How 
will you use it?”
Looks Like
Asking/answering questions focusing on the 
caregiver’s attention to child behaviors (e.g., “What 
were you thinking when he stacked the blocks? 
What worked best to help him release them?”).
Helping the family see what the next developmental 
step is and how to “up the ante” to encourage the 
child’s participation in the routine (e.g., “See how 
she is holding the hairbrush and looking at you? 
What else do you think she could do?”).
Encouraging the caregiver to reflect on what is 
important for them to work on (e.g., “What do you 
see as your next steps for potty training? What do 
you want or need?”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Asking vague or general reflection questions that 
do not support the caregiver’s participation (e.g., 
“How’s that?”).
Using handouts from assessments, curriculum 
books, or the internet to describe intervention 
without demonstrating and comparing it to what 
the child is doing in everyday activities.
Reflecting for the caregiver and leading them to 
identify your ideas and priorities for their action 
plan (e.g., “That handwashing routine went well. 
Do you think you can add drying his hands and 
putting the towel away as next steps in the routine 
this week?”).

--- Page 58 ---
52 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualConsiderations for Key Indicator 10. 
Reflection is a valuable tool  for gathering the caregiver’s 
input, increasing their role in planning, reviewing their 
participation, and encouraging decision-making. Because 
of its capacity-building value, reflection is integrated 
frequently throughout the session when the caregiver is 
available for discussion.
Reflection is a skill learned through practice.  Sharing 
strengths-based feedback about your observations 
provides concrete examples of you reflecting. Asking 
a reflection question (e.g., “How do you think that 
worked?”) after descriptive feedback keeps the exchange 
“in the moment.” Including the caregivers’ reflections 
with yours increases their confidence. 
Reflection benefits from sufficient time, focused 
attention, and context.  When engaging with the child in a routine, the caregiver may not be able to think deeply 
about a response to your reflection question. Timing of reflection is essential. Reflection during updates, following 
observation, or after caregiver practice maintains the context while allowing the focus to be on the topic and the 
discussion, not interacting with the child.
Questions that use “what do you think,” “what if,” and “how” are open-ended questions  that spark creativity 
and new ideas. Common reflection questions ask the caregiver to reflect on what did or didn’t work for them and 
their child and how they think they can use it.
Questions that have an obvious or expected answer do not support the caregiver’s process of reflection. Genuine 
reflection questions do not lead the parent to any specific answer; they encourage them to share their ideas, concerns, 
or questions about the intervention and their child’s participation.
It’s often helpful to review after each routine or activity,  rather than waiting until you are writing the action 
plan, because it can immediately summarize the strategies and routine. This information may be used to build the 
foundation for the following routine and practice. The reflection and review process encourages discussion of the big 
ideas from each routine or session, ultimately preparing the caregiver for the action plan.
At least one reflection question should review the session  or a specific routine with targets and strategies that 
were practiced during the session. Reviewing the session is an opportunity to listen to how the caregiver describes 
their actions.  It often offers opportunities to follow up on how they can increase opportunities, decrease supports, 
up the ante, or stay right where they are to ensure the target/skill is fully mastered. After review, you may decide to 
try the routine again.
Reflection & Review Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-10. Asks questions 
and makes comments 
that promote caregiver 
reflection and review -  
identifies what works for 
the caregiver and child Score Yes if there are 4 or 
more examples of reflection 
by the caregiver on the 
targets, routines, or strategies 
in response to provider 
prompts AND  at least 1 
example of review of a 
specific routine or the current 
session that identifies what 
worked and can be used in 
their next plan.Score Partial if there are 
1-3 comments or questions 
that prompt or support 
reflection from the caregiver 
on the targets, routines, 
or strategies, including a 
review OR if there are 4 
reflection questions related 
to current session targets, 
routines, or strategies 
without any review.Score N/O if there are no 
comments or questions to 
prompt reflection from the 
caregiver on strategies, 
specific routines, or what 
worked in the session.
KI-10Asks questions and makes comments that promote caregiver reflection and 
review - identifies what works for the caregiver and child 

--- Page 59 ---
53 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-10Asks questions and makes comments that promote caregiver reflection and 
review - identifies what works for the caregiver and child 
Using Reflection and Review
Reflection involves more than simply asking and answering questions. The key lies in the questions asked, their purpose, 
and the way they are posed. Reflective questions should be followed by periods of silence, allowing caregivers the 
opportunity to respond while giving you time to prepare follow-up questions when and if needed. Caregiver participation 
tends to increase when they feel that their responses and comments are valued and included in the intervention. 
Engaging in collaborative reflection enhances the caregiver’s understanding of the intervention process. It equips you 
with strategies to better support them.  
The questions provided below are intended to be used as examples to springboard your own ideas. Follow-up questions 
are presented as a strategy to foster a collaborative and reciprocal conversation based on the caregiver’s input.
Reflection on embedding targets and strategies Follow-up question(s)
“How could you use those strategies during 
dressing routines?”“You gave Grace a pillow to lean against, which 
allowed her to sit comfortably while playing with  
the toys. Why do you think that worked so well?”
“I saw him pick up the Cheerios from the tray and out 
of your hand. What did you do to help him do that?”“Why do you think that worked for him?”
“How do you think Darius did today with 
toothbrushing?”“Were you ok with how it went? Was 
anything uncomfortable or awkward?“Reflection to gather and evaluate information
“How did walking change her participation in 
family activities? Did she play with her sister 
more? Follow you during chores?”“Tell me something about Erica’s walking this week 
that made you and the family smile.”“How did you know it was working?”“What strategies and routines did you find worked 
best since the last session?”
“What didn’t go as planned?”“What did you try when it didn’t work? Any 
revisions or adaptations you tried that helped?”Follow-up question(s)
Reflection for session planning
“Thinking about what you just shared in updates, 
what do you think are good next steps?”“What do you think he needs to learn to be 
successful on these targets?”
“Thinking back to previous sessions, what strategies 
that worked well before could work in this routine?”“How did you use those strategies with 
Amir?”
“Who else and when could other family members 
join in to support Carly with meals/snacks?”“How will you show them which strategies 
to use?”Follow-up question(s)
Reflection to support decision-making
“How often can you practice during play and 
chores? Does that seem like enough for Reese?”“How can you add other caregiving routines 
with Dad or Big Sister?”
“You’ve identified several strategies that are 
working well for you and Matteo. Which ones do 
you want to try when you go to the park?”“How will you know the strategies are 
working for Matteo outside of the usual play 
in the living room?”
“When and where else could this work in your day?” “What, if anything, will you need to change?”Follow-up question(s)

--- Page 60 ---
54 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-10Asks questions and makes comments that promote caregiver reflection and 
review - identifies what works for the caregiver and child 
Information GatheringWhen you use questions and comments to gather information, you 
are seeking descriptions of what did or didn’t happen, what was 
observed, or what was heard. The inquiry is a request for a statement 
of the other person’s facts or beliefs, such as those gathered during 
updates or in a routine when the caregiver describes what is or has 
happened. The question or the answer isn’t evaluative or interpretive 
and may not need further discussion. It’s informative.Differences Between:
ReflectionWhen reflecting, you are looking at or discussing information from your 
own perspective. It’s more than a statement or a description; it takes the 
information and evaluates or interprets it from a personal perspective. 
When asking a caregiver to reflect, you may be encouraging them 
to share why they felt their child struggled with a target, how one 
strategy worked better than another, what they liked about a routine, 
or what they think will be a better match for the family. Reflection 
questions are not closed-ended. There isn’t a right answer. They are 
asked to encourage the caregiver to share their perceptions, ideas, and 
assessments of a situation.Reflection to encourage problem solving Follow-up question(s)
“What else can you try if these strategies don’t work 
as planned?”“Which strategies are your “go-to” ones to 
use when it just isn’t working?”“How do you think it will work when you are on 
your own?”“For example, is it clumsy? Too hard to do 
with both boys? Just right?”
“How could you increase Joel’s motivation in this 
routine to get even more practice?”“When will you know it is time to move  
ahead or fall back during the routine?”
Review of routines and session
“Pretend I’m Zeke’s dad. How will you describe 
what to do for practice during bathtime?”“How can you explain why it’s important for 
him to use strategies?”
“Describe something we did today that helped you 
plan for Aurora’s next week.”“What strategies from today will you use to 
expand Aurora’s practice?”“Think about today. What worked that you want  
to keep doing?”“How did you help Evie play with her sister?”Follow-up question(s)
We do not learn from experience; we learn from reflecting on experience.
~John Dewey
How do I encourage reflections with the caregiver throughout the session? What do I do to match the 
supports the caregiver needs from me? 
How do I reflect on my own practice after each session? What are my takeaways from my process?Reflection

--- Page 61 ---
One way we know caregivers are gaining confidence 
is when they can describe how the child uses their 
targets to participate in everyday family routines. KI-11 
focuses on asking the caregiver to think through and 
describe how they will know the intervention promotes 
the child’s progress toward their outcomes. The use of 
self-reflection, an essential adult learning strategy, is 
the rationale behind KI-11.
The Is it working  question in the Family 5Q serves 
multiple purposes. First, it describes how the caregiver 
will measure the child’s learning of the targeted skills. It’s 
an internal snapshot or video of the child accomplishing 
the target the way the caregiver would like it to look. 
Second, when answering Is it working , the caregiver 
reviews the targets, routines, activities, and strategies 
to determine if it is a “good fit” for embedding the 
intervention now. The “fit” for the family is important 
so that it reflects what they want to do to be successful 
between sessions. Third, it’s a preview of the caregiver’s 
expectations for what the child should learn within a 
specified time period, allowing you to reflect on realistic 
goals with the caregiver. Finally, it is an opportunity for 
you and the caregiver to discuss the level of support the 
child may need to demonstrate the skill as described.  
Small steps are important steps, and answering Is it 
working  supports the child’s continuous progress while 
building the caregiver’s understanding and motivation to 
embed the child’s learning targets throughout the day.
55 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualEncourages the caregiver to describe what it will look like 
when the intervention is working - specifies a functional 
measure of the target within routines Reflection and Review
11
Examples of Key Indicator 11. 
• “What will bedtime look like when the routine is 
working the way you would like it?”
• “You made a list of words for Mollie to work 
on. How will you know she’s using them to 
communicate with you?”
• “Close your eyes and tell me what it looks like 
when Patrick plays independently. Now, what’s 
the first step he can work on this week?”
Looks Like
Emphasizing the connection between the child’s 
practice of learning targets in routines and activities 
and their progress toward broader goals (e.g., 
“Pulling to stand by the couch will help him walk 
with support, which is a small step toward walking 
independently. What will you look for this week to 
get closer to your goal?”). 
Directing the caregiver’s attention to the child’s 
current skill and to look where they will go next (e.g., 
“Katie looked at you and reached for the cookies. 
What would you like to see her ask for next? When 
and how often can we do this?”). 
Celebrating a successful interaction or activity 
and helping the family connect their actions to 
the child’s outcomes (e.g., “Frankie walked to the 
table carrying his cup because you waited and 
encouraged him. What will it look like when you 
use wait time during diaper change?”).
Doesn’t Look Like
Giving the family-specific skills that the child should 
be doing (e.g., stacking four blocks or naming 10 
body parts) without including how skills can be used 
in a meaningful routine.
Using jargon to measure progress that does not fit in 
the family activity (e.g., “Shawn will push up from the 
prone position for 60 seconds on three of four trials 
after a diaper change.”). 
Telling the family what the targets in the routine 
should be and assigning how many times to practice 
(e.g., “Chloe can make choices between apples and 
crackers at least five times in each snack. Can you see 
doing that with her?”).“The largest effect sizes were related to the use 
of evaluation strategies, such as encouraging 
the adult to think about the impact of their new 
knowledge, and reflection, in which the learner 
engages in self-assessment about the application 
of their knowledge and practice.”
Dunst & Trivette, 2009

--- Page 62 ---
56 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-11Encourages the caregiver to describe what it will look like when the  
intervention is working - specifies a functional measure of the target within routines 
Considerations for Key Indicator 11. 
When caregivers answer Is it working , they are using their own words to narrate the video they want to see as 
they work with their child during the week. Caregivers learn ways to evaluate and keep track of their child’s learning 
targets from one visit to the next. By asking the caregiver this question, you make sure the caregiver’s answer to Is it 
working  is feasible, acceptable, efficient for the caregiver, and effective for child learning.
Caregivers may find it easier to reflect on their expectations for their child’s progress when they understand why 
it’s important. Before asking caregivers to describe what progress will look like to them, explain why this information 
is important for the child and caregiver and it will help with their practice between sessions. Understanding why this 
question is asked helps the caregiver know how and what to share.
It can take time and practice for some caregivers to understand  what embedding intervention into everyday 
routines and activities looks like and how they can tell if it’s working or not. Some caregivers have an “ah-ha” moment 
early in the process, while others need you to share more examples and offer choices of options that could work for 
their family. Using concrete examples within the family’s contexts (e.g., their living room, highchair, books, and toys) 
supports the caregiver’s learning just as it does for their child.
Talk about expectations during or after coaching in the routine to provide information in the moment  when it 
is easiest to understand. KI-11 can be a summary of previous discussions on what the child is doing now and problem 
solving on expectations for the time between sessions.
For children with greater learning needs,  learning to identify small targets that can increase participation can 
also support the family’s motivation and persistence. Helping caregivers reflect on positive changes increases 
understanding of their child’s development. For some children, the progress may be slower, and the caregiver will 
need additional information on the use of support strategies. Making connections to the family’s priorities also keeps 
the focus on the “larger” learning outcomes when the child’s targets are small.
A key term in KI-11 is the word “functional.”  The caregiver’s response to Is it working should show how the child 
will use the target within routines to enhance their participation, rather than specifying a percentage or number of 
trials to measure the child’s progress. For example, “Tommy will put cups in the dishwasher to practice grasping and 
releasing objects.”
Reflection & Review Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-11. Encourages the 
caregiver to describe what 
it will look like when the 
intervention is working 
- specifies a functional 
measure of the target 
within routinesScore Yes if the provider 
makes comments/asks 
questions that promote 
the caregiver to describe 
functional measures of the 
target that are specific and 
observable in the identified 
routines.Score Partial if the provider 
takes the lead, suggesting 
what the functional 
measures of the target will 
be in their routines with 
minimal caregiver problem 
solving or reflection OR if 
the measure is not specific, 
observable, or account for 
incremental gains.Score N/O if a discussion 
does not occur OR if the 
provider describes how to 
measure without caregiver 
input OR if the description 
is general in nature without 
an observable, functional 
measure of the target in 
routines.  
 “Last week, you 
mentioned that he 
needs a little less 
help than before. 
What are you 
going to look for 
this week?”
 “How will you 
know when he 
understands  
your words 
more? What will 
he do?”
 “You want her to 
show you what she 
wants. What’s a 
realistic first step 
for this week? 
What’s a long 
shot?”
 “What would 
you want to see 
between now and 
next time to be 
able to say, ‘It’s 
going great!’?”
 “What will make 
you think, ‘Ah-ha! 
She’s getting 
it!’?” More Ways to Ask KI-11

--- Page 63 ---
57 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualMeasuring Progress is More than Numbers
Progress is personal and reflects the family’s priorities. Describing learning expectations allows you and the caregiver 
to identify a measure of the target that is meaningful to the family in their routines, an observable next step for the 
child, and a reminder to the caregiver how to embed strategies into the routine. Review the examples below to see 
“value added” for the caregiver when they describe how they will know the intervention is working.
It’s helpful to the routine and the caregiver’s role 
I’ll know it’s working when
She walks to her dad bringing a diaper and wipes 
when he asks.
It’s meaningful and measurable for the family in 
their everyday activities
I’ll know it’s working when
She gets into her car seat next to her brother and 
stays busy looking at books on their way to his 
soccer games.
It supports the caregivers to embed the targets
I’ll know it’s working when
She takes turns initiating and responding in 
conversations during the teaparty.
It reminds the caregivers of routines and 
activities that occur frequently and consistently 
I’ll know it’s working when
He uses words to tell us what he wants for snacks/
meals, when choosing toys and games, and when 
he’s getting ready for childcare or bedtime.KI-11Encourages the caregiver to describe what it will look like when the  
intervention is working - specifies a functional measure of the target within routines 

--- Page 64 ---
58 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-11 Questions and Answers
Is simply asking the question enough?
No, KI-11 is more than the question; it’s the caregiver’s self-reflection. After you ask the caregiver a KI-11 reflection 
question, you will continue with follow-up questions or comments to ensure that the caregiver’s response is a 
“right-sized” expectation for the child’s progress. Parents don’t always know how much to expect or how to know 
when or where to provide additional support to their children. Reflecting on Is it working  helps prepare for the 
action plan (KI-12).
Just like with other reflection questions, the caregiver may need scaffolds or additional information to develop a 
measurable and realistic goal for the child. Developmental information can guide the expectations around how much 
and how soon the child can accomplish the target. Think about it as a three-part process: 1) You ask what the target 
will look like when the child is making progress, 2) the caregiver describes observable and measurable behaviors 
that illustrate how it will look as the child is learning, and 3) then together, you can discuss and determine the size or 
amount of change that is realistic.?
What needs to be included in KI-11?
When listening to the caregiver reflect on how they will know it’s working, you can check to see if the key 
components are included by using FUMM (FACETS, 2000). FUMM stands for Family-identified, Useful within the 
routine, Meaningful for the child and family, and Measurable in a format that is relevant to that caregiver—all the 
components needed for KI-11. Have some FUMM with the family!?Won’t caregivers wonder why I am asking these questions?
You may wonder about the value of this question and be tempted to skip it. Don’t! It’s worth it! Caregivers may be 
surprised and not know how to answer this question at first, but that doesn’t mean it isn’t helpful. Recently, a provider 
shared that she asked this question for the first time, and the parent looked at her and said, “That’s an excellent 
question. I don’t think I have ever stopped to think about it.” They continued to reflect and review what would make 
the practice on the target a success for the upcoming week, and the provider reflected that she felt her partnership 
with the caregiver had greatly improved. You can gauge how confident and competent the caregivers feel by asking 
this question and problem solving “right-sized” answers.
Providers often report that caregiver answers do not match the measure used in educational plans. That’s fine; this 
is the family’s measure. They don’t need to identify the percent correct or number of trials. They are looking for 
the child’s participation and independence in family activities. Your documentation requirements may be written 
differently from the Family 5Q.?
How can I encourage caregivers to think about the Is it working  Q throughout the session? 
How would I answer the question “How will I know it is working?” with families I coach?ReflectionKI-11Encourages the caregiver to describe what it will look like when the  
intervention is working - specifies a functional measure of the target within routines 
Include conversations throughout the session that share helpful information for KI-11. Don’t 
wait. Talking about their expectations for what it will look like during the session sets the 
caregiver up for success when describing their vision of the plan for the next routine, as well 
as the upcoming weeks. 


--- Page 65 ---
59 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualProblem Solving and Planning
The Family 5Q framework is used in KI-12 to develop an action 
plan for caregivers to use between sessions. Answering the 
Family 5Qs helps caregivers become systematic in identifying 
opportunities and embedding multiple strategies throughout 
the day and in a variety of different routines. This short-term 
plan has specific details of what to do right now that will 
ultimately achieve the outcomes listed on the IFSP . The action 
plan is designed to be individualized, flexible, family-friendly, 
and portable. 
Engaging caregivers in reviewing and developing their action 
plan is essential because it’s their plan! Not only do caregivers 
know what will and will not work for them and their families, but 
they are the best ones to figure out how to address any changes that may need to occur if their plans are interrupted. 
Action plans developed collaboratively with the caregiver, based on practice and discussion during the session, are 
more likely to be implemented than those developed for them. Clearly and succinctly summarizing what is practiced 
in the session offers the caregiver an opportunity to discuss the jointly created plan for the future.Engages the caregiver to lead the development of an action 
plan for embedding intervention in multiple routines and 
activities throughout the day -  facilitates caregiver leadership 
and decision-makingReflection and Review
12
Examples of Key Indicator 12. 
• “Are you ready to decide on the Qs for 
today? What are your Whats  for this week? 
Are there new Whens/Wheres  to try? You 
added some new Hows . Which ones do 
you want to put on your plan?”
• “Do you want to write the action plan, 
or should I? You used a wipe-off board 
last week. Did it work, or do you want to 
try something else? Ok, let’s use it again. 
What targets and routines are you thinking 
of? Which strategies worked best for you? 
How will you know it’s working? And what 
is your backup plan if it isn’t working?”
• “Let’s look at your last action plan. What 
do you want to keep working on? Is that 
enough? Do you want to add another 
target? Do you want to add some new 
routines? Which strategies do you want to 
keep? Do you want to add anyone else to 
the plan? Tai Neeta?”
• “How do you want to capture your plans 
for the upcoming week? Sending a text 
to your mom, the childcare teacher, and 
yourself keeps everyone on the same 
page. You’re great with using talk-to-text.”Looks Like
Reviewing the action plan together, either verbally, in writing, 
via email, or any method preferred by the caregiver, to make 
sure it’s straightforward with the roles clearly assigned (e.g., 
“I’ll bring you new snack pictures next week while you work 
on the picture choices at bedtime this week.”).
Asking the caregiver open-ended questions followed by 
choices as needed to develop a flexible plan with options 
that match the child and family’s needs (e.g., “How do you 
want to try to help her pull to stand at home? Can you think 
of ways to do that at the doctor’s office or Grandma’s?”).
Summarizing together (e.g., verbally, in writing, via email, 
an activity matrix, or any method preferred by the caregiver) 
what the action plan could include for the coming period 
based on what happened in this session and the discussion 
on what next steps the caregiver wants to take.
Doesn’t Look Like
Skipping the action plan because the caregiver appears 
too busy or overwhelmed to complete any intervention 
with the child. 
Offering a plan or “homework” to the caregiver that the 
provider believes is best for the child and family. 
Assuming the caregiver knows what the plan should be 
based on the session without discussing it or writing it down.

--- Page 66 ---
Reasons (Why?):Measure   
(How will you know it’s working?):Strategies (How?):
Locations (Where?):Caregivers:Considerations for Key Indicator 12. 
Remember, the action plan belongs to the family.  It’s not homework or a list of suggestions offered by you, 
documentation of the home visit, or plans for the next one. It is the plan for what the family will do to support their 
child’s learning and participation throughout their day. It is genuinely their plan, using their words, the targets they 
prioritize for their child, the activities and routines they identify, and the strategies they confidently use to encourage 
their child’s participation and learning. 
Not all caregivers will be comfortable taking the lead in writing or reviewing the plan. Some will take the lead 
in writing, while others prefer talking it through. Ensuring the caregiver’s ideas lead the plan development is more 
important than who writes it. If the caregiver prefers, you can take turns writing, change up the format, or involve the 
siblings. Flexibility doesn’t equate to inconsistency; make sure the caregivers have all the Qs. Encourage them to use 
the 5Qs as a self-reflection checklist to be sure they have all the pertinent details. The way it looks doesn’t matter; 
having the answers to the 5Qs does.
The action plan supports caregivers to problem solve and reflect. This gives them the power to substitute 
routines and activities that might fit better into the schedule when a change occurs because of visitors, illness, or 
appointments. Life happens! Planning for change in advance (e.g., how to have a snack in the car instead of at the 
table, how to use wipes to wash hands instead of the sink at home) gives the caregiver the power to make things 
happen no matter what occurs. Encourage caregivers to have “backup plans” in mind, just in case. Generating 
solutions to unanticipated events that interrupt their everyday routines illustrates that the caregiver is confident in 
their ability to support their child’s learning anywhere or anytime. 
The action plan is a working document.  It doesn’t need to be rewritten every session but should be reviewed and 
revised as needed. Caregivers should discuss what’s working that they want to continue, what they want to add or revise 
for the future, and how they will include new opportunities. New targets, routines, or strategies can be added. The Is 
it working  Q can show the change in what the child is learning. Sometimes, it’s easier to start fresh or use a different 
format. If no revisions are needed, that could be an indication that the plan may not be working as well as it could. 
60 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualKI-12Engages the caregiver to lead the development of an action plan for 
embedding intervention in multiple routines and activities throughout the 
day -  facilitates caregiver leadership and decision-making
Reflection & Review Yes Partial Not Observed
KI-12. Engages the 
caregiver to lead the 
development of an action 
plan for embedding 
intervention in multiple 
routines and activities 
throughout the day 
- facilitates caregiver 
leadership and decision-
makingScore Yes if the provider supports 
the caregiver to take the lead to 
identify strategies ( How), specific 
routines ( When/Where ), targets 
(What ) for embedding throughout 
the day, and a description of how 
they will know it is working AND  
the caregiver makes the decisions 
based on what was practiced 
in the session on and why it is 
important.Score Partial if the 
provider takes the 
lead with minimal 
caregiver input and 
decision-making on 
the action plan OR if 
all components are not 
included OR if it is not 
related to what was 
practiced in the session.Score N/O if there is not 
a specific action plan 
with action steps with 
the caregiver’s input. Family Guided Routines Based Intervention  Action Plan
Routine s 
(When?) :Targets (What?):
© 1999 FGRBI, Updated 2025

--- Page 67 ---
KI-12Caregiver, with support from the provider, specifies their Family 5Qs to develop an 
action plan identifying Why , What , When/Where , How will the intervention occur, 
and how they will know  It is workingReflection and Review
Connecting the KIs with the Family 5Q
Every practice used in the session (KIs 1-12) includes one or more of the Family 5Qs that can be helpful when 
developing the action plan. The discussions, practice, reflection, and problem solving that occur throughout the 
session systematically promote the family’s decision-making on their next steps. As you review the FGRBI Key Indicators 
below, notice how each KI contributes to the family’s responses to five questions in their action plan. Understanding 
the interconnectedness of the KIs and the Family 5Q facilitates your ability to be flexible with each family during the 
session while also including the coaching practices that build the family’s confidence and competence.
Family updates, family priorities, and progress on child targets  (What)  - Where are 
we starting today? (When/Where, How, Is it working)
Family and provider discuss priorities and next steps for targets (What)  connected 
to IFSP (Why)  - What steps are next and why?
Caregiver guides plan for session to embed “right-sized” targets (What)  in everyday 
routines (When/Where)  - What are we going to do today and how will we do it? (How)
Observation and feedback occur on what’s working for targets (What) , routines 
(When/Where) , and strategies (How)  - What does it look like now?
Caregiver coaching and feedback to support the acquisition and functional use 
of child targets (What) embedded in multiple routines (When/Where) - How do 
you use strategies  to embed targets in your everyday routines and activities with 
confidence and competence? (How)KIs
6 & 7
61 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualCaregiver reflects on targets (What) , routines (When/Where) , strategies (How) , 
and reviews session  - What worked or didn’t that you can use to support your 
child’s learning? (Is it working)KI-10Expansion of caregiver-identified routines (When/Where)  for additional practice 
and generalization - What are some other times and places that the child can 
increase practice on the targets? (What)KI-9Problem solving discussions on intervention strategies (How)  that clarify and 
expand caregiver competence - Which strategies are or are not working? Which is 
the best match? KI-8
KI-11 Caregiver describes observable and measurable next steps (Is it working)  - How 
will you know the intervention is successful?KI-11KI-5KI-4KI-3KIs
1 & 2KI-12Engages the caregiver to lead the development of an action plan for 
embedding intervention in multiple routines and activities throughout the 
day -  facilitates caregiver leadership and decision-making

--- Page 68 ---
Reflection and Review
62 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualFamily and Provider Quotes: What works for KI-12?
“I try to keep the plan specific enough 
that the caregiver can see at least a little 
progress every week. If the targets are 
‘right-sized’ and strategies match the 
routines, then the updates at the following 
session can be reasons to celebrate. I think 
caregivers find more time to embed when 
the plan is simple, and they can see the 
child working on something they need.” 
Provider“Trisha is the best. We talked through 
the plan, and she wrote it down and sent 
me a copy on my phone. I need a visual 
reminder. Talking through the 5Qs really 
helps me see how I can make it work. 
The text reminds me to do it.”
Caregiver“I’m terrible at keeping track of paper, 
but I always know where the refrigerator 
and the bathroom mirror are! Since so 
many of our routines are in the kitchen 
and bathroom, those are the best spots 
for posting my 5Q notes.”
Caregiver
The Family 5Q format is flexible to meet the caregiver 
and child’s needs. Checklists, whiteboards, text 
messages, activity matrices, and sticky notes on the 
mirror in the bathroom are all strategies that can help 
caregivers remember the specific targets, strategies, 
and expectations necessary for the child’s learning. 
Caregivers may benefit from a variety of formats to 
master new strategies (e.g., a whiteboard on the 
refrigerator to review signs, a text or photo on their 
phone to list strategies, or a short video to share 
with other caregivers demonstrating positioning). 
Adults, including caregivers and providers, rarely learn 
new information from hearing or watching a brief 
demonstration without the opportunity to practice, 
discuss, or reflect. Providing reminders with key 
information is valuable to support implementation. Strategies to Help the Caregiver Reflect & Remember
Why? (Reason):   
Participate in the things he likes to do
What? (Targets):   
Imitate sounds/ gestures; stand with 
support
When? /Where?  
(Routines & Location):   
Play , recreation / Bath, yard
How? (Strategies):  
Wait time, label, physical assist, 
environmental arrangement
Is it working? (Measure):   
Repeat sounds, clean up toys
Why?  (Reason):
What?  (Targets):
When?  (Routines)/  
Where?  (Locations):
How?  (Strategies):
Is it working?  (Measure):“I have tried lots of ways to help families 
develop an action plan that works best for 
them. They come up with what they are 
going to do and decide how they want 
to remember it. Some like forms to post, 
some want texts, and others use sticky 
notes. My documentation is separate, so 
we can be as flexible as they want.” 
Provider
What strategies do I use to keep the Family 5Q relevant and useful for each session? 
After the session, how do I answer the question, “What did the family learn from me today?”ReflectionKI-12Engages the caregiver to lead the development of an action plan for 
embedding intervention in multiple routines and activities throughout the 
day -  facilitates caregiver leadership and decision-making

--- Page 69 ---
Bernheimer, L. P ., & Keogh, B. K. (1995). Weaving interventions into the fabric of everyday life: An approach to 
family assessment. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 15 (4), 415-433.
Bernheimer, L. P ., & Weisner, T. S. (2007). “Let me just tell you what I do all day...”: The family story at the 
center of intervention research and practice. Infants & Young Children, 20 (3), 192–201. 
Dunst, C. J., & Trivette, C. M. (2009). Using research evidence to inform and evaluate early childhood 
intervention practices. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 29(1), 40-52. 
FACETS (2000). Monitoring Progress on Family-guided Routines [Handout]. Family-guided Approaches 
to Collaborative Early-intervention Training and Services, University of Kansas Affiliated Program, 
Parsons, KS.
Friedman, M., Woods, J., & Salisbury, C. (2012). Caregiver coaching strategies for early intervention providers: 
Moving toward operational definitions. Infants & Young Children, 25 (1), 62-82.
IA-DMM (2019). 20 18 Early ACCESS Family Interview Report . 
Kashinath, S., Woods, J., & Goldstein, H. (2006). Enhancing generalized teaching strategy use in routines by 
parents of children with autism. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 49 (3), 466-485. 
Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F., & Swanson, R. A. (2005).  The adult learner: The definitive classic in adult 
education and human resource development. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lorio, C. M., Romano, M., Woods, J., & Brown, J. (2020). A review of problem solving and reflection as 
caregiver coaching strategies in early intervention. Infants & Young Children, 33 (1), 35-70.
Magnuson, K., & Schindler, H. (2019). Supporting children’s early development by building caregivers’ 
capacities and skills: a theoretical approach informed by new neuroscience research. Journal of Family 
Theory & Review, 11 (1), 59-78.
McCollum, J. A., & Yates, T. J. (1994). Dyad as focus, triad as means: A family-centered approach to 
supporting parent-child interactions. Infants & Young Children, 6 (4), 54-63.
Merriam, S. B., & Baumgartner, L. M. (2020).  Learning in adulthood: A comprehensive guide. John Wiley & 
Sons.
Romano, M., Lorio, C., Delehanty, A., Eugenio, J., Abarca, D., Trivedi, B., & Brown, J. (2022). Family routines 
within caregiver implemented interventions: A scoping review. Journal of Early Intervention, 44 (4), 
371-392. 
Salisbury, C., Woods, J., Snyder, P ., Moddelmog, K., Mawdsley, H., Romano, M., & Windsor, K. (2018). 
Caregiver and provider experiences with coaching and embedded intervention. Topics in Early 
Childhood Special Education, 38 (1), 17-29. 
Schwartz, I., & Woods, J. (2015). Making the most of learning opportunities. In R. M. Santos (Eds.), DEC 
Recommended Practices: Enhancing Services for Young Children With Disabilities and Their Families.  
Arlington, VA. Division for Early Childhood.
Shonkoff, J. P . (2011). Protecting brains, not simply stimulating minds. Science, 333 (6045), 982-983.
Woods, J. J., Wilcox, M. J., Friedman, M., & Murch, T. (2011). Collaborative consultation in natural 
environments: Strategies to enhance family-centered supports and services. Language, Speech, and 
Hearing Services in Schools, 42 (3), 379-392.
Woods, J., & Lindeman, D. (2008). Gathering and giving information with families. Infants & Young Children, 
21(4), 272-284.
Woods, J., Snyder, P ., & Salisbury, C. (2018). Embedded practices and intervention with caregivers (EPIC): 
Linking instruction and family capacity-building recommended practices. In P . A. Snyder, & M. L. 
Hemmeter (Eds.), DEC Recommended Practices Monograph Series: Instruction . Arlington, VA. Division 
for Early Childhood.
63 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualReferences

--- Page 71 ---
Early Care  
and Education
© 2025 Mollie Romano & Juliann Woods


--- Page 73 ---
We believe in the importance of service delivery options for 
families. Early care and education (ECE) programs offer an 
environment for consistent adult-child and peer interaction, 
developmental learning opportunities, toys and educational 
materials, and a safe and supportive environment for social-
emotional well-being. Families may decide to use ECE in lieu 
of or in addition to home-based services. Caregiver coaching is 
appropriate for both, without one being preferential to the other. 
The model remains FGRBI because the family is still engaged in 
their child’s embedded intervention program, even if they are not 
being coached directly by the provider. 
We use the term ECE to be inclusive of community-based childcare centers, early childhood (birth-5) education 
programs, family in-home childcare, and other more informal social supports (e.g., relatives, neighbors, or parent 
cooperatives) outside of the child’s home. Just as we used the terms “family,” “parents,” and “caregivers” to 
describe the adults who were coached to support the child’s learning during home visits, we will use “caregivers” 
and “teachers” to describe those supporting the child’s learning within ECE programs. Different programs may have 
various titles for their staff (such as teacher, lead, assistant), so it’s essential to understand the roles and preferred titles 
of the individuals you are working with in order to show respect and foster collaboration. Ensuring the environment 
is maximized for the child’s learning necessitates the use of a collaborative coaching approach with both family 
members and caregivers in the program. We have learned that establishing and maintaining collaboration increases 
success for coaching. Recognizing and respecting the contributions, experiences, and interests of the ECE caregivers 
and teachers is an essential component of the coaching process.Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
67 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingProviders frequently ask us the question, “So, how do you do all this in childcare? That’s where I see most 
of my kids.” Our traditional response has been that once you know the KIs, it is not hard to shift from home 
visiting to ECE or childcare programs. While we still believe that is true, we understand that not everyone is 
comfortable jumping in without a little guidance and encouragement. So here you go! We have compiled 
information, resources, and practical ideas to help you with the differences in this addition to the 2025 
FGRBI Key Indicators Manual. 
Rationale for FGRBI and SS-OO-PP-RR in Early Care & Education
Application of FGRBI and SS-OO-PP-RR in Early Care & Education
SS-OO-PP-RR Coaching in  
Early Care and Education Programs
In case you skipped the introduction to the FGRBI Key Indicators Manual, we offer a few reminders. The KIs 
represent evidence-based practices for embedding intervention into everyday routines and activities to support 
child development and learning. As described in this guide, the KIs have been used as a fidelity measure to promote 
consistency of service delivery and to support program sustainability within home-based programs. We use the 
KI Checklist to guide implementation and professional development. Currently, we do not have sufficient data to 
consider the use of the KI Checklist form within ECE programs as a fidelity measure. We do, however, believe it offers 
a general guide to support consistent implementation for coaching caregivers to embed instructional strategies 
for young children and can also serve as a tool for self-assessment and professional development. We have tested 
variations of SS-OO-PP-RR and the KI Checklist in multiple studies (e.g., Romano & Woods, 2018). Those studies show 
that the core coaching components can be used to collaboratively coach teachers while enhancing child outcomes 
in daily classroom routines. 

--- Page 74 ---
While the KI practices are appropriate for both the home and classroom settings, there are some differences in how 
they would be implemented in ECE. Generally, there is more variability in how, when, and how much the practices are 
implemented when the setting includes multiple children and caregivers rather than with family members. “Where” 
you coach is not different- you’re coaching in everyday routines and activities! Pulling the child to the side or leaving 
the room for individual intervention is not congruent with the philosophy and guidance from Part C, IDEA, or FGRBI. 
Rather, providers approach the partnership with the ECE caregivers or teachers as they do with the family members, 
with the intent to build their capacity to support the child’s individualized learning needs within their everyday 
routines and activities while also engaging with peers.
ECE programs may have specific guidelines and procedures that necessitate flexibility in the application of the KIs in 
a single visit. For example, the classroom may have a specific schedule for all children to follow, or certain materials 
may only be available for designated activities, limiting access for coaching specific routines. Time is also a factor 
that can influence the provider’s ability to coach, problem solve, reflect, and plan in multiple diverse routines within 
a session. ECE coaching sessions are often shorter, and time for collaboration and communication may occur within 
activities instead of before and after. However, our research supports the process of caregiver coaching using the 
basic FGRBI practices and principles with modification. The purpose of the comparison table below is to share 
examples of modifications and strategies for success using the model in ECE settings.
Home Visiting vs. ECE Programs
We’ve adapted the “Looks Like-Doesn’t Look Like” section of the KI manual to a comparison table for the two 
types of programs. There are lots of similarities, but some key differences as well.
Home ECE
Service delivery model identified on IFSP by 
the team with family as their preferred natural 
environment 
• Can be changed as family priorities or needs changeService delivery model identified on IFSP by team 
with family as their preferred natural environment
• Should include a regularly scheduled home-based 
component and session update(s)
Collaborative partnership that recognizes and 
respects knowledge, experiences and priorities of 
family Collaborative partnership that recognizes and 
respects knowledge, experiences and priorities of 
early childhood educators, caregivers, in addition to 
family 
• Communication between classroom caregivers 
and family should be established and maintained 
in a format that works for everyone (e.g., texts, 
notes, voicemail)
Family’s routines, activities, organization, linguistic 
and cultural preferences are the context Classroom model, curriculum, routines and schedules 
serve as context. 
• Family’s routines, activities, linguistic and cultural 
preferences are integrated into classroom 
intervention as possible for continuity between 
environments
• Generalization between settings should be a 
priority for embedding
68 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingECESS-OO-PP-RR Coaching in ECE Programs

--- Page 75 ---
69 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingCollaborative partnership with family as decision 
maker to establish intervention that matches 
caregiver’s values and prioritiesECE partners integrate family priorities and 
collaborate on implementation within their program 
model 
• Teachers have experiences, expertise, and priorities 
that may influence their use of intervention 
strategies in the coaching process requiring 
collaboration on the best approach for the child
• Curriculum may emphasize learning targets and 
preferred instructional strategies requiring integration 
of family priorities to ensure a coordinated program
Focus on parent – child interaction in their everyday 
routines and activities using their materials, 
locations, and expectationsSupportive interactions between child and 
caregivers, and when possible, other children in their 
everyday routines and activities
• Intervention is embedded into ECE routines and 
schedules with peers participating when possible
• Classroom expectations are delineated and support 
the child’s current skills and plan for new targets
• Responsive (or universal) intervention strategies are 
prioritized as they support learning for all children
• Use of specialized instructional strategies are jointly 
planned to support the child and classroom success
Use of specific coaching strategies embedded in 
routines matched to family/caregiver learning to 
build confidence and competenceUse of specific coaching strategies embedded 
in routines and activities matched to setting and 
teacher/caregiver learning to build confidence and 
competence
• Coaching strategies are individualized for the 
teacher, child, and routine
• Previous experience of caregiver’s are valued and 
maximized in the coaching process 
Multiple, diverse routines identified by parent/
caregiver to provide sufficient opportunities for 
learning to occurIntervention within multiple, diverse routines 
identified to provide sufficient opportunities for 
learning to occur
• Opportunities to embed may be fewer in a single 
routine (e.g., book reading) because of the other 
children’s participation, but more routines are likely 
available throughout the day
• Problem solving with the teacher is used to identify 
times throughout the day for repetition
Ongoing plan of action (Family 5Q) supports 
implementation between visitsOngoing plan of action supports implementation 
between visits
• Plan may extend for multiple sessions
• Updates on plan are shared with familyECESS-OO-PP-RR Coaching in ECE Programs

--- Page 76 ---
Getting Started
Collaborative partnerships  are crucial to establishing the classroom coaching process.  Just like with families, 
every center and classroom within the center is unique.  Your skills in connecting, communicating, and coaching 
to build capacity will support coaching in diverse community settings that range from Early Head Start centers 
to faith-based institutions and home-based childcare. Building a trusting and reciprocal partnership is key to 
your success. This partnership extends beyond the ECE teachers and caregivers to the administrators of the 
program. Everyone, including the family, needs to understand and agree to the coaching process for it to be 
beneficial for the child.
Communicating a clear definition of caregiver coaching  is an essential first step for success. Coaching with 
caregivers and teachers in ECE is a strength-based collaboration focused on the identification and implementation 
of supports and strategies for the child’s learning targets that can be embedded into their classroom or group’s 
routines and activities. Clarity on the coaching process is important because it may involve changing the 
perspectives of the ECE staff. Administrators and classroom teachers may expect a pull-out procedure and be 
surprised by the coaching process in the classroom. Comments may include “It’s always been done this way” 
or “The other children will distract the child or interfere with your therapy” when the provider explains their 
intent to join in the classroom activities. In addition to verbal and written explanations of coaching, joining in an 
activity as a partner to demonstrate the coaching may help clarify the process.ECESS-OO-PP-RR Coaching in ECE Programs
Focal KIs for ECE
We believe the 12 KIs are important for ECE as well as home-based sessions. While some do not garner as much 
attention due to the setting, time available, or multiple children served, they are still applicable and can be adapted 
to suit individual needs. Some could occur together, such as KIs 1 and 2. KI-3 may be a component of KIs 6 and 8. 
KI-5 might be three or four 10-second observations instead of one 20-second observation. KI-8 may be combined 
with KI-6 frequently, and KI-11 could be folded into KI-12. The key features of SS-OO-PP-RR are described below.
Common Sequence
Quick check-in and 
greeting 
Updates on the child’s 
targets and reflections from 
caregivers/teachers on how 
the strategies are working. 
(KIs 1 and 2)1
Sharing child information 
Information exchange or review as 
needed on why coaching is key, why 
these targets matter, developmental 
information as needed, and how 
embedding works. 
(KI-3)2
Joint plan for 
the day 
Plan may be 
repeated or 
varied slightly for 
multiple sessions. 
(KI-4)3
Observation and 
feedback
Observation 
length may be 
shortened.  
(KI-5)4
Coaching and 
feedback
Should occur in 
multiple jointly 
identified routines 
in ECE schedule.  
(KIs 6 and 7)5
Problem solving 
on instructional 
strategies 
Collaborative plan 
for teacher and 
family.
(KI-8)6
Review of 
current and 
potential 
routines for 
embedding
Ongoing process. 
(KI-9)7
Developing an action plan  
An action plan that includes measures of 
progress until the next session, a review of 
who does what, reflections on the session, and 
a schedule for the next visit. Don’t forget to 
update the family on the session as well!
(KIs 10-12)8
70 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver Coaching

--- Page 77 ---
71 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingFamily Guided Routines Based Intervention
Using SS-OO-PP-RR as a Familiar and 
Flexible Framework in ECE Programs
Setting the Stage
Setting the Stage (SS) with teachers in ECE settings focuses on the same goals, 
practices, and principles as those described for home visits; however, as mentioned 
previously, the process differs to accommodate the setting and collaboration with the 
teachers while including and engaging the family through ongoing communication. 
When SS occurs in the classroom, we continue to incorporate the FGRBI Key Indicators 
(KIs) to support the collaborative relationship, gather and discuss updates for the 
child’s targets and classroom routines, exchange information to support next steps, 
and develop the plan for the session.
Considerations for Setting the StageConsiderations for Setting the Stage
• In the classroom, SS may be more fluid than during a home visit. The KIs occur in an abbreviated manner and 
continue throughout the session as time and the context permit.
• Rather than a sit-down and catch-up conversation, providers may plan a short-hand information exchange that 
works for your partnership with the educator and the classroom. Gathering updates while joining in with the 
classroom activities ensures that teachers do not need to take “time away” from the group to update you. For 
example, picking up toys while hearing about what is new, or chatting while helping the teacher set up art projects 
or center time, are both examples of ways to get updates without interrupting the classroom’s schedule.
• While abbreviated and somewhat fluid, it’s important to encourage the teacher to reflect on what has occurred 
since your last collaboration so that the updated information can be used to develop the plan for the current visit.
• Updates are a time to catch up on what is working and what is not in the plan. It is also an opportunity to review 
and answer questions about the coaching process and the roles each partner plays.
• In classrooms with multiple teachers, it can be helpful to have one primary point of contact to connect with each 
session. However, be sure to gather updates and reflections from each individual who interacts with the child. This 
helps to ensure consistency in cases of staff changes and that all potential partners with the child are included. It 
also maximizes learning opportunities for the child when multiple caregivers are included.
• Updates may be shared on a wall chart, text message, or brief description as the activity starts. Check with the ECE 
program guidelines for confidentiality.
• Session plans will reflect the classroom schedule of routines and activities. Targets and strategies will continue or 
be revised based on updates and requests for support during the visit.
• Try to schedule sessions based on the classroom schedule of activities and routines so that coaching occurs during 
opportunities for high-frequency practice.
• Collaborative experiences over time will increase fluency of the intervention and the efficiency of the coaching 
process as the relationship evolves.
The child’s targets, connected to the IFSP and based on family priorities, will be similar at home and in the classroom. 
However, there may be targets specific to the classroom that are not relevant or priorities for the family at home, e.g., 
clearing the table after snack, sharing toys, sitting on a chair at a table for play, and taking turns with peers and these 
targets will support the child’s participation within the classroom routines and with other children. They should be 
included in the development of the session plan. Please remember, some home targets may not be appropriate at ECE. 


--- Page 78 ---
Observation & Opportunities to Embed
Observation and Opportunities to Embed (OO) occurs within 
the classroom much as it does in home visits. Observation 
is a mainstay for gathering information for coaching during 
each session. Moments of observation throughout the 
session help providers identify future routines, targets, or 
strategies that may be useful. Observations may be shorter 
(sometimes significantly shorter when multiple children are 
involved) and not immediately tied to the session plan. Even 
brief observations provide an opportunity for feedback to 
the caregivers! Just like with families, observations also 
ensure that teacher/child interactions are at the forefront 
of each session.
Considerations for Observation and Opportunities to EmbedConsiderations for Observation and Opportunities to Embed
• Providers may find that they join the teacher and children in the routine and participate briefly before 
sitting back to capture an observation of what is currently happening in the routine.
• Strengths-based feedback may not occur immediately following the observation if it will interrupt the 
ongoing interactions or activity, but it should not be forgotten! Save it for a transition moment or when the 
kids are all engaged, so it will not be intrusive to share. Learn some shortcuts with feedback that provide 
encouragement and information in the moment. 
• Due to time and availability for discussion, the diversity of coaching strategies used in classrooms may 
vary more than they do in home visits. 
• DT and Dem/N may occur more frequently in the classroom, especially for new targets and strategies in 
the activity with children as a group. 
• Joining in routines and activities with all the children increases the collaborative partnership. It’s not 
only that two heads are better than one and four hands are better than two, but your observation and 
participation facilitate the identification of what is or isn’t working. 
• GP is helpful for engaging and maintaining child participation as well as revising or adding instructional 
strategies.
• CP with feedback is a priority, because the teacher may have only 1-2 opportunities to practice with the 
focus child in a specific routine. Coaching, including CP , in multiple routines is necessary to support the 
teacher to embed the target and strategies. 
• Using the same cluster of instructional strategies in multiple routines can increase the teacher’s acquisition 
rate and fluency using the strategies.
• Peers are outstanding “coaches” and “influencers” for the child. Their supportive interactions multiply the 
learning opportunities while increasing each child’s social development. Engaging peers also makes coaching 
interactions easier for teachers because they can include the group, not just one child at a time. 
• Coaching across teachers in the classroom promotes the child’s opportunities throughout the day. More 
opportunities with multiple teachers are better than one! Including additional caregivers in the classroom 
also promotes their learning for other children. ECEUsing SS-OO-PP-RR Framework in ECE Programs
72 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver Coaching

--- Page 79 ---
ECEUsing SS-OO-PP-RR Framework in ECE Programs
73 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingProblem Solving and Planning (PP) are key components that make sure teachers can adapt, expand, and modify 
strategies as needed throughout their day to increase opportunities for the child. However, these exchanges might 
be quick, and they may occur in “spurts” throughout the session. For some providers, it may be hard to keep the 
problem solving exchanges going when there are frequent interruptions (i.e., noses need to be wiped, a parent 
pops in the door, or a child trips and needs a hug). On the other hand, teachers can be masterful multitaskers 
and are used to returning to conversations where they left off. Providers should consider strategies to help them 
initiate and return to problem solving conversations, even if the exchanges take place bit by bit during sessions.
Considerations for Problem Solving and PlanningConsiderations for Problem Solving and Planning
• Teachers will not likely be able to focus solely on the conversation, so non-verbal cues within the exchanges 
might look different in classrooms than they do in home-based settings. For instance, teachers might not 
make direct eye contact when offering up ideas if they are also wiping a table or helping a child put on 
their shoe. This does not signify a lack of engagement. You may also get lots of “uh’s or yeah’s” as you go, 
but that doesn’t indicate disinterest either. Make sure to create space for teacher participation by asking, 
“What do you think”? 
• Providers could use visual supports like the Family 5Q or the FGRBI Routine Categories to help with 
problem solving. Learning about the program’s daily schedule enables you to learn about potential 
routines for embedding, just like it does in homes. 
• Consider using asynchronous methods to get started or to keep a conversation going. A quick text to 
preview the teacher with a message like “Remind me to ask you how his seating supports are going and 
if we need to change anything!”  
• Use more specific conversation starters like “What might be some pros and cons of this strategy during 
the transition to the playground?” or “What do you think a backup strategy should be if the first one 
doesn’t work?”  Problem Solving & PlanningReview & 
Action Plan
Greeting/
UpdatesPlanJoin in/ 
Observe/ 
Coach/ 
Feedback
Join in/ 
Observe/ 
Coach/ 
FeedbackReflect/ 
Problem 
Solve/  
PlanIt is important to remember that your coaching can and should adapt for each child, setting, and teacher 
involved. Joining in the identified routines for embedding may necessitate pre-planning so that you and the 
teacher are ready for interactions as you arrive. You may also complete two to five routines and activities together 
before there is time for feedback, reflection, and problem solving. The graphic below illustrates the fluidity 
between the SS-OO-PP-RR components. It also emphasizes the importance of adequate time and opportunity 
for coaching with teachers.

--- Page 80 ---
ECEUsing SS-OO-PP-RR Framework in ECE Programs
Reflection and Review (RR) conversations need to be efficient. Like many components in ECE, the ‘talk-based’ 
coaching strategies may need to take place while simultaneously engaging other children. Linear conversations 
are rare in group settings. While teachers are often used to weaving in adult-to-adult exchanges within child-
oriented interactions in a group, providers may not need to learn this skill. 
Reflection on the session in ECE is crucial because visits often have so much “action” that taking a moment to 
process might make the difference in whether the teacher identifies important ideas from the session or whether 
they will move on with their day without taking much from the visit at all. Planning for between sessions is also 
key, just as it is with families. Teachers in ECE are often familiar with planning, and they may have a process that 
they can build on for individualized support for each child. Take the time to learn about how they ordinarily plan 
for activities (or whether they follow a thematic sequence or curriculum) so that you can offer ideas for how to 
create a meaningful plan for individualized supports that works for both of you.
Considerations for Reflection and ReviewConsiderations for Reflection and Review
• Let teachers know that you’ll reflect and plan together as part of each session. This insight into the 
coaching process helps them understand their role and facilitates their ability to reflect and plan with you. 
• Come prepared with a few “ready to go” reflective questions to use: “What do you think worked best for 
him today?” or “Did you notice anything today that you hadn’t noticed before?” 
• Ask teachers how they want to plan for between sessions. Do they like to use whiteboards, written notes, 
or an action plan handout? Teachers will have different preferences. Asking what works best for them 
builds the expectation that joint planning will occur, and it aligns the planning with their preferred learning 
style. Electronic communications, such as text messages or emails, can help solidify plans, particularly 
if the session concludes on short notice. Whether low- or high-tech tools are used, be sure you have a 
record of them to use while gathering updates during the next visit. 
• Follow the plan you made with the teacher to communicate with the family who will take the lead, what 
will be sent, when, and how. Joint communication supports collaboration.Reflection & Review
74 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingCommunication Supports
We’ve used various strategies to support 
teachers in embedding targets in routines. 
They are individualized to match the 
individual teacher and their specific setting.

--- Page 81 ---
There aren’t any routines, what should I do?
Not every setting has established predictable routines, although many do. Some level of busyness and commotion is 
to be expected with multiple infants and toddlers present. Differing child-to-teacher ratios or mixed age groupings can 
make it more challenging to build predictable routines that benefit both the child with a disability and all the children 
in the classroom. Before proposing adaptations or suggesting how to build routines, take the time to understand 
the teacher’s perspective. Gather information about what they believe is working in their classroom and what could 
be improved for the children. Listening to their thoughts will help you collaborate on effective problem solving and 
empower them to create sustainable routines that work for everyone. If the teacher doesn’t yet recognize the benefit 
of routines, consider sharing information about the value of routines for embedding intervention for the child.?
How can I move from their “special therapy space” into the classroom?
This can be tricky, but it does offer you an entry point into discussing what FGRBI is and how you work within classrooms! 
You can pivot the conversation by saying something like, “Thanks so much for showing me this space. I can see how 
dedicated you are to helping kids with disabilities and delays learn and grow. The model I use, though, takes place 
with the child in the classroom. This way, I can work with their teacher to find ways to embed strategies into the things 
they do together every day to support the child’s development—whether that’s walking, talking, gesturing, or feeding 
themselves. With this model, the child gets a chance to practice every day, not just when I am here, and they can learn 
while interacting with familiar people, including their teacher and peers!” You can share more information about the 
model with handouts, information from research, or even about your program’s approach. ?What do I do if the partnership feels awkward initially?
Survey and focus group research tell us that, overall, teachers are open to collaboration with providers. However, they 
may not be sure how—what will they do, what will you do, and how will it impact their classroom. Teachers might 
assume that you are going to complicate their day, and until the partnership is established, you may. Your presence 
is novel and may change interactions between the children. If teachers don’t understand that you want to join them 
as a partner to support the focal child, they may perceive you to be a visitor or an additional pair of hands to provide 
general help in their classroom. There are other reasons that awkwardness may occur initially. Differences in age, 
experience, culture, or social norms can impact how you are welcomed into the classroom. It is also important to 
realize that the teachers may be experiencing stressors of their own or are incredibly busy at the time you arrive. Also, 
they may not realize that you, too, are unsure of how to develop a partnership with them. Little by little, you can build 
trust and contribute to the classroom as a partner to support the child’s learning. ?
I had a great relationship with one teacher, but the child transitioned to the next age 
group. What do I do now?
One of the hardest things about working within ECE programs is how often the adults around the child change. Turnover 
is high, and children age up to other classrooms. To minimize the impact of transitions, there are two essential steps 
you can take. First, get to know ALL the teachers in the program. This takes time, but making sure that everyone knows 
who you are and what you do makes it easier as the child changes rooms. The director can also play an important 
role in introducing you to everyone. Make an effort to greet other teachers and staff when the opportunity arises. The 
second step is to maintain well-defined intervention plans in a format that is friendly for teachers. Using a visual model, 
whiteboard, or even a simple notebook can help create continuity between teachers. If a child has a planned move 
between rooms, you can plan this move collaboratively with the two teachers and the family.?ECE Questions and AnswersECEUsing SS-OO-PP-RR Framework in ECE Programs
75 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver Coaching

--- Page 82 ---
Teacher and Provider Quotes: What works for ECE?ECEUsing SS-OO-PP-RR Framework in ECE Programs
76 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver Coaching
She focused on all the children and 
helped us teachers come up with a 
plan, and showed us more interactions. 
She supported the whole classroom 
and the teachers. She always asked 
our feedback and wanted to make 
sure we were comfortable to move 
onto the next step.
I developed a planning and update 
form for the classroom staff to know 
what Adam was working on each 
week. I used the form to share 
strategies the teacher could try, and 
then offered to demonstrate or work 
alongside them to try it. I didn’t make 
a big deal about “coaching”. I just 
joined in and we talked while we 
worked with Adam and others. 
She just gave me a level of confidence 
that I didn’t know that I had working 
with the kids. So it brought me out a 
lot more, it kind of took away my shell 
a little bit, and let me be a lot more 
confident in working with the kids.
We started small.  I joined in with 
the teachers for story time, centers, 
and snacks—the activities that were 
occurring while I was there for my 
session. It gave me the opportunity 
to share ideas that would fit into their 
plans. Later, we started planning and 
keeping track between visits.  
It was my job to get a plan, set it up, 
and work with it and then to see the 
outcome of that plan...
My childcare center had a spot for me 
to do pull-out physical therapy. But 
after I had been coaching caregivers 
in my home-based visits, I wanted to 
try it with my kids at childcare. One 
of the teachers was open to the idea 
and worked with me to figure out 
how we could collaborate. It took us 
a while to identify the best routines 
and strategies that gave us the most 
opportunities. But we both agree it’s 
amazing, and I’m not going back to 
pull-out!Provider Teacher
Final Thoughts
We believe the 12 FGRBI Key Indicators are important for Early Care and Education programs as well as home-
based early intervention. While some do not garner as much attention due to the setting, time available, or multiple 
children, they are still integral to the model. Some may be combined, such as KIs 1 and 2. KI-3 may be a component 
of KIs 6 and 8, KI-5 might be three or four 10-second observations instead of one 20-second observation, KI-8 
may occur before or after CP in KI-6, or KI-11 may be folded into KI-12 with the plan to be repeated across several 
sessions. Adaptations will vary. The value of the KIs lies in the consistent attention to both the practices and the 
underlying principles, no matter the setting.

--- Page 83 ---
77 © 2025 Romano & Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver CoachingRomano, M., Eugenio, J., & Kiratzis, E. (2021). Coaching childcare providers to support toddlers’ gesture use with 
children experiencing early childhood poverty. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 52 (2), 686-701.
Romano, M., & Woods, J. (2018). Collaborative coaching with Early Head Start teachers using responsive 
communication strategies. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 38 (1), 30-41.
Friedman, M., & Woods, J. (2015). Coaching teachers to support child communication across daily routines in Early 
Head Start classrooms. Infants & Young Children, 28 (4), 308-322.ReferencesECEUsing SS-OO-PP-RR Framework in ECE Programs
ECE caregivers, teachers, and environments vary 
widely, just as families and homes do . It’s important 
to remember that appearances can be misleading. Each 
classroom, facility, or in-home childcare setting has its own 
culture that deserves respect. Additionally, every teacher 
or caregiver brings valuable knowledge, life experience, 
and expertise that are crucial to the success of the child’s 
intervention. 
Treat each teacher as an individual with unique 
knowledge and experiences that contribute to and 
enhance collaborative partnerships. Teachers who may 
not have extensive backgrounds in early childhood 
development or education can still bring valuable insights 
from their personal experiences, such as caring for younger 
siblings, babysitting, or their own children. 
Time is a valuable commodity.  Planning ahead with 
teachers can help maximize the time available for caregiver 
practice, while preparing for reflection and problem solving 
can lead to meaningful discussions. Once a “plan” for the partnership has been established, maintaining consistent 
interactions, coaching, and documentation ensures that both teachers and providers feel confident in their ability to 
achieve their goals in supporting the child.
Routines are not the same as schedules  and can successfully occur throughout the day based on the teacher’s 
preferences. Flexibility is key. Many ECE programs offer early morning, late afternoon, and evening hours. Learning 
who cares for children during these time blocks and what they do during those times ensures that you are maximizing 
opportunities for the children while adhering to the program’s structure. Schedules change. Holidays, special events, and 
changes in staff assignments all occur regularly. Instead of feeling frustrated, focus on generalization!
Communication strategies between providers, teachers, and families will vary  and should be tailored to 
accommodate the preferences of the caregivers. Options for communication may include sending notes home from the 
classroom, texts, or emails; however, the choice of the best method is up to the caregiver. Conversations with teachers 
are confidential, so it’s best to avoid discussing the child in front of others. Keeping these discussions private helps build 
trust and ensures everyone feels comfortable. 
Be creative and consider ways to boost  teachers’ and staff members’ understanding of early interventio n. 
Brief group trainings on intervention strategies can benefit all the children in the program. Consider offering snacks or 
organizing convenient training hours. Providing opportunities like these helps build relationships with the ECE program 
and may also benefit teachers by earning in-service hours. Consider creating short-form videos (Instagram Reels, YouTube 
Shorts, TikTok) as a way to share strategies or developmental information when they have a moment. This offers a way 
to lead into coaching and helps teachers “see” the strategy in action. 
Using instructional strategies that are appropriate for all children is highly effective.  Responsive instructional 
strategies serve as an excellent starting point for both children and teachers, since they can be used widely with groups 
and easily adapted. Additionally, when these strategies involve peers, they promote inclusion for the child.
What have we learned?

--- Page 85 ---
Appendices
© 2025 Juliann Woods


--- Page 87 ---
Supplemental Materials
81 © 2025 Juliann Woods Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Key Indicators ManualFGRBI Coaching Strategies (KI-6, p. 36)  ................................................................. 83
FGRBI Family Routine Categories (KI-6, p. 37)  ....................................................... 87
Systematic Use of Evidence-Based Instructional Strategies (KI-8, p. 45)  ............... 89
Embedding in Everyday Routines (KI-9, p. 49)  ....................................................... 95
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Action Plan (KI-12, p. 60)  ................. 97

--- Page 89 ---
83 © 2012 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
FGRBI Coaching Strategies
A variety of general and specific coaching strategies to support caregiver-implemented intervention in 
families’ everyday routines and activities are used in early intervention.
General Coaching Strategies Specific Coaching Strategies
• Information Sharing (IS)
• Observation* (Ob)• Direct Teaching (DT)
• Demonstration with Narration* (Dem/N)
• Guided Practice* (GP)
• Caregiver Practice* (CP)
• General and Specific Feedback (GF & SF)
• Problem Solving (PS)
• Reflection (Re)
In this document, “provider” refers to any member of the of the child and family’ s team. Use of these strategies should be in 
the context of caregiver and child participation within the family identified routine or activity .Note* Should occur within routines
Information Sharing (IS)
The caregiver and provider exchange information about the child’s and family’s outcomes, priorities, and IFSP . 
Both participate in the conversation by asking and answering questions, listening, sharing ideas, and clarifying 
information relevant to the intervention. Information sharing is used to gather updates about the child and family, 
progress on outcomes, child health status, and other services. IS is used to review priorities, share developmental 
information and resources, and plan for the session.
• e.g., Dad shares updates on their activities and the child’s participation in home/community routines while the 
provider listens and asks follow-up questions.
• e.g., Mom shares that she successfully got an eye doctor’s appointment for next week for Ella and herself.
• e.g., The provider shares resources on safe finger foods as Dad offers updates from last week, and they plan 
for the snack routine.
*Observation (Ob)
Ob occurs when the caregiver interacts with the child while the interventionist observes quietly. The primary role 
of the caregiver is to interact with the child in a new or familiar routine; the role of the provider is to observe, 
gather information, and after observing, share specific feedback with the caregiver. The provider should be nearby 
but not part of the activity. Observations should last at least 20 seconds before feedback to ensure an adequate 
picture is obtained. Specific feedback builds on the caregiver’s strengths for engaging the child’s participation in 
the interaction. 
• e.g., The provider observes Sarah’s handwashing routine. Mom waits for Sarah to ask before turning the water 
on and offering her soap. Sarah requests excitedly and completes the routine, including drying her hands.General Coaching Strategies

--- Page 90 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
Direct Teaching (DT)
The provider shares information about a specific intervention strategy or how to establish opportunities for 
repetition in a routine with the intent for the caregivers to learn how to support their child’s learning. The child 
may or may not be included in the interaction during the explanation of the strategy and how it helps support 
development. A handout or video clip may be used for illustration.
• e.g., The provider tells the caregiver, “Mikala can reach for toys easier when her trunk is stable. You can help 
her be stable by placing your hands slightly above her waist as you hold her on your lap. This will allow her to 
use her arms to reach. As she gains strength, you can use less and less support to help her.”
*Demonstration with Narration (Dem/N)
The provider takes the lead in demonstrating a strategy with the child while the caregiver observes. The provider 
sets up the demonstration by telling the caregiver what she is going to do and why. The provider narrates during 
and after the demonstration with the purpose of explaining how to use the strategy as it is being demonstrated. 
Dem/N offers caregivers an opportunity to see the strategy while also observing how the child responds. Dem/N 
may be repeated and should evolve into GP or CP so that the caregiver can practice while the provider is available 
for support.
• e.g., The provider positions the child on her lap and places the book on the child’s lap so he can see the 
pictures and turn the pages. She explains how Mom can put her arms around the child and physically assist 
him to turn the page and point to the picture as she names it. The provider asks Mom if she has any questions 
and then places the child on her lap with the book so she can try.
*Guided Practice (GP)
In GP , the provider supports the caregiver and child to learn new strategies or skills or practice ones that have been 
revised in the identified routine. The provider may offer suggestions about how or when to use a strategy, how 
to adapt materials, where else to embed the strategy to increase opportunities, recommend variations or share 
examples of other strategies to try. The provider may join in briefly to try a strategy with the caregiver and child 
during the routine but backs out for the caregiver to continue practicing with the child. The caregiver should have 
multiple turns to practice using the strategy(ies). GP often leads to CP .
• e.g., The provider hands Mom a cup and suggests she hold it in front of Anna for a moment giving her an 
opportunity to reach for it.
• e.g., While playing ring around the roses, the provider guides Mom to not fall down until Mia “tells” her to, 
via either gestures or words.
• e.g., The provider suggests to Dad that he move a few of the toys behind him so the child wasn’t distracted 
by so many options for play.
*Caregiver Practice (CP)
The caregiver takes the lead in interacting with the child as the provider observes and supports the interaction 
as needed. As the caregiver practices, the provider identifies the caregiver and child’s strengths to share specific 
feedback to the caregiver or child’s behavior, offer encouragement, or ask a reflective question without interrupting 
the routine. The provider is less actively involved or ‘hands-on’ than in GP . The intent is for the caregiver to practice 
new or revised strategies in a familiar or new routine with the provider available to offer GP , DT, or Dem/N only as 
needed. SF or Re follows each CP .
• e.g., Grandma uses a brief wait time and a smile to encourage Amy to take a turn during book reading rather 
than asking, “What’s that?” Grandma waits after reading the title; Amy vocalizes, and Grandma turns the page. 
Amy points, vocalizes, and looks up at Grandma to “tell” her about the picture. When the book is finished, the 
provider asks Grandma what she thought went well.
• e.g., Mom asks Billy where he wants to sit to put on his shoes. Billy helps by lifting up each foot when it is time 
for his socks and then his shoes while Mom shows him and labels the clothing items as she puts them on. She 
waits for him to stand up on his own so they could go outside.Specific Coaching Strategies
84 © 2012 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 91 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
General and Specific Feedback (GF and SF)
The provider comments about the caregiver’s use of strategies with the child or the child’s behavior/responses. 
Feedback may be specific (citing something the provider observed) or general in nature encouraging or affirming 
participation. SF to the caregiver is encouraged throughout the session to provide additional information to the 
caregiver about what is working and why. SF that links what the caregiver does to how the child responds promotes 
confidence and competence. Feedback may be provided during or after the routine and may be directed to the 
child or the caregiver. Feedback should occur after observation, guided practice, and caregiver practice.
• e.g., “Look at you both smiling!” (GF)
• e.g., The provider comments to Dad, “Emil stacked the blocks when you handed him 1 at a time. He piled 
them 6 high! You gave him time and your attention while he put it on top.” (SF)
• e.g., The provider makes a comment to the child that serves as feedback on Mom’s strategy use, “You like it 
when Mom imitates your sounds, don’t you? You just keep talking back to her.” (SF) 
• e.g., “Awesome! You did great, Sebastian!” (GF)
Problem Solving (PS)
The caregiver and provider consider and discuss routines, outcomes/targets, and strategies to identify options 
and revise or expand the current plan. Both parties contribute, define, or clarify solutions to a problem, situation, 
or concern and develop an action plan for when or how the strategy will be used in the routine. If needed, the 
provider supports the caregiver’s active participation with questions and comments for discussion, such as “What 
do you think worked,” “What didn’t feel quite right,” or “What do you think will make this easier for you or the 
child to participate?” The provider and caregiver must contribute substantively for at least 2 turns in the exchange 
that results in ideas to try, different routines for practice, or plans for new outcomes for it to be PS.
• Provider: “How do you think we could help him get the ball to you?”
Mom: “Maybe if I hold the laundry basket, he can throw the ball into the basket.” 
Provider: “That’s a great idea. Have you tried ‘ready, set, go’ to get his attention?”
Mom: “Not here, but other times like on the swing. It helps; I’ll try it.”
Reflection (Re)
The provider supports the caregiver in reflecting on a routine, home visit, strategy, or child’s progress. The provider 
may ask questions or make comments to encourage the caregiver to reflect. Re encourages the caregiver to 
generate ideas to enhance strategy use and ways to generalize strategies to new routines. Reflection helps the 
caregiver put words around what the child is learning to do and how they want it to look as Re is made. The 
provider may also build or expand upon the caregiver’s comments to encourage continued Re. Videos or other 
tools may be used to create opportunities for reflection.
• e.g., “Let’s watch this video clip to see how he responded when you gave him a ‘job’ to do while cleaning up 
after breakfast. Tell me what you think you did to make this work so well.”
• e.g., “You told me that drinking from a cup wasn’t working very well. What do you think makes that so hard?”  
• e.g., “What are some activities you do outside with the family that Ava could join? How could that benefit 
your family? ”Specific Coaching Strategies
Friedman, M., Woods, J., & Salisbury, C. (2012). Caregiver coaching strategies for early intervention providers: 
Moving toward operational definitions. Infants & Young Children, 25 (1), 62-82.
Woods, J. J., Wilcox, M. J., Friedman, M., & Murch, T. (2011). Collaborative consultation in natural environments: 
Strategies to enhance family-centered supports and services. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 
42(3), 379-392.References
85 © 2012 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 93 ---
Play Routines Caregiving Routines
Play with Objects/
Constructive PlayPretend Play Transition(s), Care, and 
SafetyDressing Related
Physical Play Social Games Hygiene Related Food Related
Learning Activities Community and Family Errands
Literacy and Books Music, Songs, and 
RhymesFamily Chores Community and Family 
Errands
Technology Supported Writing and Drawing Socialization Activities Family RecreationFGRBI Family Routine CategoriesFamily Guided Routines Based Intervention
87
© 2004 FGRBI  
Updated 2024Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  
http://fgrbi.com 

--- Page 95 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
1
2
3
4Functional/Familiar
Universal
Specific
Extended
Responsive Strategies
Engage with me!
• Face-to-face positioning
• Join focus of child’s 
attention
• Follow child’s lead
• Read child’s cues
• Name simple objects
Play with me!
• Gain and maintain child’s 
attention
• Use interesting actions & 
words
• Take turns
• Repeat actions and words
Talk with me!
• Talk about what’s happening
• Use child’s language
• Label new words
• Encourage responses & 
respondSpecific Support 
Strategie s
Expect engagement
• Waiting
• Choices
• Environmental 
arrangement
• Balanced turns
• Playful interruptions
Expand learning
• Ask open-ended 
questions
• Suggest extensions of 
activity
• Expansions
• Recasts
Elicit responses
• Contingent imitation
• Pause before next step
• Antecedent strategies
Encourage participation
• Provide reinforcement
 oNaturally occurring
 oImmediate
 oContingentExtended Support 
Strategies
• Prompts
 oVisual
 oVerbal
 oGestural
 oPhysical
• Prompt sequence & 
fading procedures
 oLeast to most 
participation prompts
 oMost to least prompts
 oMilieu teaching prompt 
sequence
 oGraduated guidance
• Accommodations & 
adaptations
 oAssistive technology
 oOrthotics
 oMaterial arrangement
• AAC
 oSpeech-generating 
device
 oPicture communication 
cards
• Visual schedules
 oFirst-then boards
 oRoutine schedules
 oDaily activitiesFamily Strategies
• Family-identified 
strategies to support 
child participation
• Everyday materials and 
routines
• Family activities and 
routines that work for 
themMany instructional strategies with an evidence base have been used effectively in parent-implemented 
interventions and caregiver coaching with infants and toddlers. The strategies listed in the graphic below 
are helpful tools when considering how to support the caregiver and child’s learning. Building on the family’s 
strengths with familiar and functional strategies and supports they are already using is an essential first step. 
Responsive or universal intervention strategies are integral throughout the intervention process and build a 
foundation for positive caregiver/child interaction. Specific support strategies are valuable when caregivers 
teach the child new or complex behaviors. Extended support strategies offer the most structure and support 
or address the child’s specific learning needs. Most, if not all, of the strategies are familiar and intended to be 
used with caregivers to ensure options that match the child and family are available. The intent is to use the 
lowest level of support for the child and caregiver to be successful and reduce support as targets are learned, 
increasing the child’s functional and independent use.Systematic Use of Instructional Strategies
89 © 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 96 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
Universal Strategies
Responsive StrategiesFunctional/Familiar
Family Strategies
Caregivers know their child and have strategies they use to support their child's learning. They may 
not know their names or even know they are using them! These strategies and supports provide a 
strengths-based foundation for expanding the caregiver's ability to embed intervention throughout 
the day.
Family-identified strategies to support child participation
• Strategies that caregivers identify or describe that they currently use to support their child’s learning. 
• Strategies that caregivers identify as comfortable and a good fit for their family.
Everyday materials and routines
• Supports, such as child-preferred items (e.g., toys and clothing, favorite cups, or toothbrush) and proximity 
are used with the child to increase ease of participation. 
Family activities and routines that work for them
• Activities, routines, and strategies observed by providers that families use naturally to support the child 
that they did not identify or may not realize are functional for their child’s learning.
The responsive interaction strategies in this list are supports for parent-child engagement and can be 
useful for embedding a wide variety of targets in routines and play. Building on what the parent already 
uses and works for the child promotes participation for both. Systematically expanding the strategies 
as needed can provide options for the parent to use in other routines, to increase opportunities for the 
child, and to increase independence and diversity.
Engage with me!
• Face-to-face positioning:  Arrange positioning (e.g., sit, hold, bend, use an infant seat) so that the child 
and adult are comfortably face-to-face to facilitate interaction. 
• Join focus of child’s attention:  Join the child in looking at or interacting with family materials or child-
preferred objects in an activity (e.g., sit at their level, put your hand out as a request for an object, do what 
they do) to maximize opportunities for simple interactions that are interest-based and directed by the child.  This handout provides definitions for instructional strategies caregivers use to support their child's 
learning in everyday routines and activities.Definitions of Instructional Strategies
90 © 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 97 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
• Follow child’s lead:  Identify the child’s focus of attention and follow the child’s focus as their interest 
changes. Comment on their interest, label the new interest, and give them time to process and respond to 
your comment. 
• Read child’s cues:  Observe the child’s signals and actions in an activity or routine. Anticipate and respond 
to the child’s looks, sounds, and movements to know when to support their engagement, avoid frustration, 
and expand learning. Reading cues and responding to the child’s focus of attention builds their trust and 
partnership in the interaction. 
• Name simple objects:  Use sounds, gestures, and words to name familiar objects and identify actions (e.g., 
reaching toward or pointing to an object, using sounds/simple words to label the object and action) to 
provide experiences in hearing sounds and seeing signs that lead to understanding and using language.  
Play with me!
• Gain and maintain child’s attention:  Encourage the child to focus with you on an object or action and to 
continue the interaction throughout play and everyday routines in addition to focusing on their interests 
and following their lead. 
• Use interesting sounds, actions, and words:  Label objects and actions that are interesting and functional 
for the child to increase their attention and support communication learning. This may include making 
animal or truck sounds, changing pitch or tone when saying familiar words, and adding fun actions to 
interactions. 
• Take turns:  Take back and forth turns (serve and return) with the child in the interaction. Respond and 
wait for the child before responding again. Hugs, kisses, sounds or words, silly faces, clapping, or simple 
actions such as dropping or stacking blocks are examples of early turn taking play routines. 
• Repeat actions and words:  Repeat words, gestures, and actions within an interaction and throughout the 
day to provide repetition that is essential to learning. 
• Build routines:  Responding to child attempts, approximations, and target behavior in a similar manner 
within the activity establishes predictability that allows the child to anticipate what is coming next and to 
be prepared to participate which in turn increases independence for the child. Routines can be as simple 
as using “1-2-3-Go” before letting go of the swing or rolling a ball to each other or a series of steps such 
as a snack routine.
Talk with me!
• Talk about what’s happening:  Describe what you are doing when the child is attending to your actions or 
your actions are impacting the child (e.g., brushing child’s hair). Describe what the child is doing. 
• Use child’s language : Use the child’s preferred words for specific items or actions (e.g., “Blue kitty” for the 
favorite stuffed animal; “round and round” for their favorite spinning game). 
• Label new words:  Use new descriptive words to go along with familiar words (e.g., “fast car” “big 
bubbles” “green socks”). Add more specific words to general familiar categories (e.g., “water” instead of 
“drink”; “race car” instead of “car”). 
• Encourage responses and respond:  Build on early back and forth turn-taking actions with objects by 
expanding responses and including language.
91 © 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 98 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
Specific Strategies
Specific Support Strategies
These intervention strategies focus on the individual needs of the child and parent to teach specific 
targets embedded in routines. We say they are increasing skills because specific attention is directed 
to the child’s acquisition and competence in using the skill. The caregiver may add one or more of 
these to the responsive strategies already in place to increase skills or frequency of practice.
Expect engagement
• Waiting:  Gain the child’s attention and pause. Use facial expressions and body language that signal that 
the adult is interested and ready to interact. Always give the child an opportunity to respond to the adult’s 
attention and take a turn. Continue the interaction by responding and waiting for the child again. If the 
child does not respond in a few seconds, offer another cue to encourage the child’s response and model 
the response if the child does not respond after 2-3 opportunities. Variations of this strategy are also 
known as time delay or positive expectation. 
• Choices:  Offer the child a verbal or nonverbal choice (e.g., hold up two items and see which the child 
reaches for; ask the child, “Play with cars or Play-Doh?”). Be sure the choices are meaningful and 
motivating to the child.
• Environmental arrangement:  This is a broad strategy that includes arranging materials in the environment 
to promote access, interaction, and communication. Examples include: visible but out of reach: cup is 
on the counter so the child will request it for a drink; setting up boundaries: placing toys on a blanket 
to designate the play space; organized spaces: toys or objects have a specific location for access to 
encourage turn-taking, communication, and social interaction with others; doing something unexpected 
(playfully): putting their shoe on their hand instead of foot.
• Balanced turns:  This strategy builds on basic turn-taking to extend interaction and increase child initiation. 
Child turns may be communication attempts or motor actions in familiar routine. Too many turns from one 
partner leads to decreased initiation and participation by the other partner. Prompts or cues are provided 
as needed to support the child’s participation and then to fade the supports.
• Playful interruptions:  Get in the way of the child’s play to encourage them to communicate their requests 
or imitate your actions. Interruptions should be fun and not cause frustration.
Expand learning
• Ask open-ended questions:  Ask the child a question that provides them an opportunity to independently 
generate ideas or actions (e.g., “What comes next?” or “Where should we go?”).
• Suggest extensions of activity:  Add supplemental material to the activity to connect it to other areas of 
learning.
• Expansions:  Repeat the child’s communication or motor or play action and add something small and 
related. Expanding connects what the child already knows and can do to new information or skills. It 
supports learning through observation and imitation.
• Recasts:  Repeat the child’s communication or motor movement in a more advanced or correct way. 
Recasting reinforces both the child’s attempts and the caregiver’s clear models, which are important for 
child learning. Supporting another turn to practice with more information or adaptation is important to 
increase accuracy.
92 © 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 99 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
Elicit responses
• Contingent imitation:  Join in and repeat what the child says or does (gesture/action/words) to establish 
an interaction. Think of it as a “copycat” strategy with the child taking the lead.
• Pause before the next step:  Give the child a moment to process information before switching the activity 
or target. Intentional pausing supports understanding and interaction and can provide opportunities to 
respond (such as using expectant waiting/time delay strategies).
• Antecedent strategies:  Preventative strategies that are used to minimize challenging behaviors. This may 
include removing aspects of the environment that provoke an undesired response from the child.
Encourage participation
• Social reinforcement:  Celebrate the child for their attempts at targeted behavior and skills with positive 
social responses such as smiles, excited facial expressions, and attention.
• Naturally occurring:  The response is the reinforcer. For example, when the child asks for a cookie, he gets 
a cookie. When he pulls up to the couch, he is standing there with you. The cookie or the standing is the 
natural consequence. You do not need to say “good talking” or “good standing.” 
• Immediate:  Providing the child with immediate encouragement or reinforcement increases their 
enjoyment of the activity or routine and maintains a high level of motivation. The immediacy of response 
also helps the child connect the impact of their action or communication. 
• Contingent:  Reinforcement given after a specified behavior is done supports the likelihood of repeating 
the same behavior in similar circumstances. Expectations need to be clear and static.
Extended Strategies
Extended Support Strategies
Children may need additional specialized supports layered on top of or integrated within foundational, 
responsive, and specific support strategies. Information on these types of intervention strategies 
should be planned by the team in collaboration with the family and should address the unique needs 
of the child.
Prompts
• Visual:  Using cues that are visible to the child to support communication, participation, and use of other new 
skills. Visual prompts may include gestures, directed gaze, pictures, visual organizers, or picture schedules.
• Verbal:  Verbal assistance given to the child that helps them use target skills such as spoken words, signs, 
or phrases.
• Gestural:  Gestures (e.g., pointing, hand gesture, head nod) used to encourage the child’s participation.
• Physical:  Physically guiding or touching the child to help them use the target behavior or skill.
Prompt sequence & fading procedures
• Least to most participation prompts:  Provide the least intrusive or supportive prompt possible (e.g., 
time delay or a task direction) and increase support if the child needs it (for example, if the child does not 
respond to a time delay to request “help,” ask “what do you want” or tell him to “say help”; if the child 
does not respond to a direction to “turn the water on” to wash hands, increase support by pointing while 
saying “turn the water on,” or use a touch cue moving his arm toward the faucet).
93 © 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 100 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
• Most to least:  Providing the child with the most supportive prompt first, then decreasing the intrusiveness 
of support as the routine progresses.
• Milieu teaching prompt sequence:  A prompting procedure in which the child’s interest in the 
environment is used as a basis for teaching. This is best used when a child asks for something (makes a 
request) at a lower-than-target level. Go through a prompting sequence (stopping when the child uses the 
target level request) – start with a time delay (wait expectantly), then ask, “What do you want?” then offer 
a choice between two things (list the desired item/action second), then a model prompt (e.g., say “desired 
object/action”). If the child doesn’t produce the target level, repeat the model prompt and complete the 
request (do not “hold out” - honor the communication attempt while helping support to target level).
• Graduated guidance:  Provide the amount and type of assistance that the child needs to complete the 
targeted behavior and reduce support as the child begins to use the skill (e.g., begin by providing full 
support for transitioning to sitting and reduce support as soon as the child begins to acquire the skill). Be 
careful to fade support as quickly as possible to encourage the child’s independence!
Accommodations & adaptations
• Assistive technology:  Any item that supports a child’s ability to participate actively in his or her home, 
childcare program, school, or other community settings. Examples include walkers, Braille books, spoons 
with wider handles, and positioning pillows.
• Orthotics and related physical technology support:  Artificial support or brace for the limbs or 
spine, helmets, splints, or related materials to support physical positioning and movement to increase 
engagement in activities.
• Material arrangement:  The use and placement of materials relevant to the child’s needs and organized/ 
provided in a way that is easy for them to access, understand, and use.
AAC
• Speech-generating device:  Computerized speech-output devices that increase opportunities for 
communication.
• Picture communication cards:  To communicate, the child may use cards with pictures, symbols, or words 
to ask for things, comment on things, or answer questions.
Visual Schedules
• First-then boards:  A support to clarify expectations by showing the child what first needs to be 
completed before gaining access to one of their preferred items/activities. A visual support may include 
objects, pictures, and/or written words.
• Routine schedules:  A visual support that provides the steps within a routine or the materials used in a 
routine. This promotes understanding and engagement within a routine.
• Daily activity schedule:  A visual support that gives the child information about what is going to happen, 
what is happening, the sequence of events, and when it is time to stop an activity and move on to another.
94 © 2022 FGRBI, Updated 2025 Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  

--- Page 101 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
95
Play
PhEmbedding in Everyday Routines
Which intervention strategies can I use in routines to support learning?
Identify routines and intervention strategies in the boxes to practice the target identified in the circle.
© 2005 FGRBI  
Updated 2024Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  
http://fgrbi.com Playtime
Books/Social Games/SongsSnacks/MealsCommunity
Targets we are 
working on
Chores
OtherPhysical PlayHygiene/Dressing

--- Page 103 ---
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention
97
Routine s 
(When?) :Targets (What?):
Reasons (Why?):Strategies (How?):
Measure   
(How will you know it’s working?):
Locations (Where?):Caregivers:Family Guided Routines Based Intervention Action Plan
© 1999 FGRBI  
Updated 2025Family Guided Routines Based Intervention (FGRBI) and Caregiver Coaching  
http://fgrbi.com 

--- Page 106 ---
Created by:
Family Guided Routines Based Intervention and Caregiver Coaching
in collaboration with the
Communication and Early Childhood Research and Practice (CEC-RAP) Center
Florida State University
http://fgrbi.com
©2025

